1,0,1
‘Myths grow like crystals,
according to their own recurrent
pattern; but there must be a suitable
core to start their growth.’ –
attributed to the remembrancer
Koestler (fl. M2)  ‘The difference
between gods and daemons largely
depends upon where one is standing at
the time.’ – the Primarch Lorgar
‘The new light of science shines
more brightly than the old light of
sorcery. Why, then, do we not seem to
see as far?’ – the Sumaturan
philosopher Sahlonum (fl. M29)  
1,0,1
ONE

Blood from misunderstanding Our
brethren in ignorance The Emperor
dies ‘I was there,’ he would say
afterwards, until afterwards became a
time quite devoid of laughter. ‘I
was there, the day Horus slew the
Emperor.’ It was a delicious
conceit, and his comrades would
chuckle at the sheer treason of it.
The story was a good one. Torgaddon
would usually be the one to cajole
him into telling it, for Torgaddon
was the joker, a man of mighty
laughter and idiot tricks. And Loken
would tell it again, a tale rehearsed
through so many retellings, it almost
1,1,1
told itself. Loken was always careful
to make sure his audience properly
understood the irony in his story. It
was likely that he felt some shame
about his complicity in the matter
itself, for it was a case of blood
spilled from misunderstanding. There
was a great tragedy implicit in the
tale of the Emperor’s murder, a
tragedy that Loken always wanted his
listeners to appreciate. But the
death of Sejanus was usually all that
fixed their attentions. That, and the
punchline. It had been, as far as the
warp-dilated horologs could attest,
the two hundred and third year of the
Great Crusade. Loken always set his
story in its proper time and place.
1,1,2
The commander had been Warmaster for
about a year, since the triumphant
conclusion of the Ullanor campaign,
and he was anxious to prove his new-
found status, particularly in the
eyes of his brothers. Warmaster. Such
a title. The fit was still new and
unnatural, not yet worn in. It was a
strange time to be abroad amongst
stars. They had been doing what  they
had been doing for two centuries, but
now it felt unfamiliar. It was a
start of things. And an ending too.
The ships of the 63rd Expedition came
upon the Imperium by chance. A sudden
etheric storm, later declared
providential by Maloghurst, forced a
route alteration, and they translated
1,1,3
into the edges of a system comprising
nine worlds. Nine worlds, circling a
yellow sun. Detecting the shoal of
rugged expedition warships on station
at the outsystem edges, the Emperor
first demanded to know their
occupation and agenda. Then he
painstakingly corrected what he saw
as the multifarious errors in their
response. Then he demanded fealty. He
was, he explained, the Emperor of
Mankind. He had stoically shepherded
his people through the miserable
epoch of warp storms, through the Age
of Strife, staunchly maintaining the
rule and law of man. This had been
expected of him, he declared. He had
kept the flame of human culture
1,1,4
alight through the aching isolation
of Old Night. He had sustained this
precious, vital fragment, and kept it
intact, until such time as the
scattered diaspora of humanity re-
established contact. He rejoiced that
such a time was now at hand. His soul
leapt to see the orphan ships
returning to the heart of the
Imperium. Everything was ready and
waiting. Everything had been
preserved. The orphans would be
embraced to his bosom, and then the
Great Scheme of rebuilding would
begin, and the Imperium of Mankind
would stretch itself out again across
the stars, as was its birthright. As
soon as they showed him proper
1,1,5
fealty. As Emperor. Of mankind. The
commander, quite entertained by all
accounts, sent Hastur Sejanus to meet
with the Emperor and deliver
greeting. Sejanus was the
commander’s favourite. Not as proud
or irascible as Abaddon, nor as
ruthless as Sedirae, nor even as
solid and venerable as Iacton Qruze,
Sejanus was the perfect captain,
tempered evenly in all respects. A
warrior and a diplomat in equal
measure, Sejanus’s martial record,
second only to Abaddon’s, was
easily forgotten when in company with
the man himself. A beautiful man,
Loken would say, building his tale, a
beautiful man adored by all. ‘No
1,1,6
finer figure in Mark IV plate than
Hastur Sejanus. That he is
remembered, and his deeds celebrated,
even here amongst us, speaks of
Sejanus’s qualities. The noblest
hero of the Great Crusade.’ That
was how  Loken would describe him to
the eager listeners. ‘In future
times, he will be recalled with such
fondness that men will name their
sons after him.’ Sejanus, with a
squad of his finest warriors from the
Fourth Company, travelled in-system
in a gilded barge, and was received
for audience by the Emperor at his
palace on the third planet. And
killed. Murdered. Hacked down on the
onyx floor of the palace even as he
1,1,7
stood before the Emperor’s golden
throne. Sejanus and his glory squad
– Dymos, Malsandar, Gorthoi and the
rest – all slaughtered by the
Emperor’s elite guard, the so-
called Invisibles. Apparently,
Sejanus had not offered the correct
fealty. Indelicately, he had
suggested there might actually be
another Emperor. The commander’s
grief was absolute. He had loved
Sejanus like a son. They had warred
side by side to affect compliance on
a hundred worlds. But the commander,
always sanguine and wise in such
matters, told his signal men to offer
the Emperor another chance. The
commander detested resorting to war,
1,1,8
and always sought alternative paths
away from violence, where such were
workable. This was a mistake, he
reasoned, a terrible, terrible
mistake. Peace could be salvaged.
This ‘Emperor’ could be made to
understand. It was about then, Loken
liked to add, that a suggestion of
quote marks began to appear around
the ‘Emperor’s’ name. It was
determined that a second embassy
would be despatched. Maloghurst
volunteered at once. The commander
agreed, but ordered the speartip
forwards into assault range. The
intent was clear: one hand extended
open, in peace, the other held ready
as a fist. If the second embassy
1,1,9
failed, or was similarly met with
violence, then the fist would already
be in position to strike. That sombre
day, Loken said, the honour of the
speartip had fallen, by the customary
drawing of lots, to the strengths of
Abaddon, Torgaddon, ‘Little
Horus’ Aximand. And Loken himself.
At the order, battle musters began.
The ships of the speartip slipped
forward, running under obscurement.
On board, Stormbirds were hauled onto
their launch carriages. Weapons were
issued and certified. Oaths of moment
were sworn and witnessed. Armour was
machined into place around the
anointed bodies of the chosen. In
silence, tensed and ready to be
1,1,10
unleashed, the speartip watched as
the shuttle convoy bearing Maloghurst
and his envoys arced down towards the
third planet. Surface batteries
smashed them out of the heavens. As
the burning scads of debris from
Maloghurst’s flotilla billowed away
into the atmosphere, the
‘Emperor’s’ fleet elements rose
up out of the oceans, out of the high
cloud, out of the gravity wells of
nearby moons. Six hundred warships,
revealed and armed for war. Abaddon
broke obscurement and made a final,
personal plea to the ‘Emperor’,
beseeching him to see sense. The
warships began to fire on Abaddon’s
speartip. ‘My commander,’ Abaddon
1,1,11
relayed to the heart of the waiting
fleet, ‘there is no dealing here.
This fool imposter will not
listen.’ And the commander replied,
‘Illuminate him, my son, but spare
all you can. That order not
withstanding, avenge the blood of my
noble Sejanus. Decimate this
“Emperor’s” elite murderers,
and bring the imposter to me.’
‘And so,’ Loken would sigh, ‘we
made war upon our brethren, so lost
in ignorance.’ It was late evening,
but the sky was saturated with light.
The photo-tropic towers of the High
City, built to turn and follow the
sun with their windows during the
day, shifted uneasily at the
1,1,12
pulsating radiance in the heavens.
Spectral shapes swam high in the
upper atmosphere: ships engaging in a
swirling mass, charting brief,
nonsensical zodiacs with the beams of
their battery weapons. At ground
level, around the wide, basalt
platforms that formed the skirts of
the palace, gunfire streamed through
the air like horizontal rain, hosing
coils of tracer fire that dipped and
slithered heavily like snakes, die-
straight zips of energy that vanished
as fast as they appeared, and
flurries of bolt shells like
blizzarding hail. Downed Stormbirds,
many of them crippled and burning,
littered twenty square kilometres of
1,1,13
the landscape. Black, humanoid
figures paced slowly in across the
limits of the palace sprawl. They
were shaped like armoured men, and
they trudged like men, but they were
giants, each one hundred and forty
metres tall. The Mechanicum had
deployed a half-dozen of its Titan
war engines. Around the Titans’
sootblack ankles, troops flooded
forward in a breaking wave three
kilometres wide. The Luna Wolves
surged like the surf of the wave,
thousands of gleaming  white figures
bobbing and running forward across
the skirt platforms, detonations
bursting amongst them, lifting
rippling fireballs and trees of dark
1,1,14
brown smoke. Each blast juddered the
ground with a gritty thump, and
showered down dirt as an after-curse.
Assault craft swept in over their
heads, low, between the shambling
frames of the wide-spaced Titans,
fanning the slowly lifting smoke
clouds into sudden, energetic
vortices. Every Astartes helmet was
filled with vox-chatter: snapping
voices, chopping back and forth,
their tonal edges roughened by the
transmission quality. It was
Loken’s first taste of mass war
since Ullanor. Tenth Company’s
first taste too. There had been
skirmishes and scraps, but nothing
testing. Loken was glad to see that
1,1,15
his cohort hadn’t grown rusty. The
unapologetic regimen of live drills
and punishing exercises he’d
maintained had kept them whetted as
sharp and serious as the terms of the
oaths of moment they had taken just
hours before. Ullanor had been
glorious; a hard, unstinting slog to
dislodge and overthrow a bestial
empire. The greenskin had been a
pernicious and resilient foe, but
they had broken his back and kicked
over the embers of his revel fires.
The commander had won the field
through the employment of his
favourite, practiced strategy: the
speartip thrust to tear out the
throat. Ignoring the greenskin
1,1,16
masses, which had outnumbered the
crusaders five to one, the commander
had struck directly at the Overlord
and his command coterie, leaving the
enemy headless and without direction.
The same philosophy operated here.
Tear out the throat and let the body
spasm and die. Loken and his men, and
the war engines that supported them,
were the edge of the blade unsheathed
for that purpose. But this was not
like Ullanor at all. No thickets of
mud and clay-built ramparts, no
ramshackle fortresses of bare metal
and wire, no black powder air bursts
or howling ogre-foes. This was not a
barbaric brawl determined by blades
and upper body strength. This was
1,1,17
modern warfare in a civilised place.
This was man against man, inside the
monolithic precincts of a cultured
people. The enemy possessed ordnance
and firearms every bit the
technological match of the Legion
forces, and the skill and training to
use them. Through the green imaging
of his visor, Loken saw armoured men
with energy weapons ranged against
them in the lower courses of the
palace. He saw tracked weapon
carriages, automated  artillery;
nests of four or even eight automatic
cannons shackled together on cart
platforms that lumbered forward on
hydraulic legs. Not like Ullanor at
all. That had been an ordeal. This
1,1,18
would be a test. Equal against equal.
Like against like. Except that for
all its martial technologies, the
enemy lacked one essential quality,
and that quality was locked within
each and every case of Mark IV power
armour: the genetically enhanced
flesh and blood of the Imperial
Astartes. Modified, refined, post-
human, the Astartes were superior to
anything they had met or would ever
meet. No fighting force in the galaxy
could ever hope to match the Legions,
unless the stars went out, and
madness ruled, and lawful sense
turned upside down. For, as Sedirae
had once said, ‘The only thing that
can beat an Astartes is another
1,1,19
Astartes’, and they had all laughed
at that. The impossible was nothing
to be scared of. The enemy – their
armour a polished magenta trimmed in
silver, as Loken later discovered
when he viewed them with his helmet
off – firmly held the induction
gates into the inner palace. They
were big men, tall, thick through the
chest and shoulders, and at the peak
of fitness. Not one of them, not even
the tallest, came up to the chin of
one of the Luna Wolves. It was like
fighting children. Well-armed
children, it had to be said. Through
the billowing smoke and the jarring
detonations, Loken led the veteran
First Squad up the steps at a run,
1,1,20
the plasteel soles of their boots
grating on the stone: First Squad,
Tenth Company, Hellebore Tactical
Squad, gleaming giants in pearl-white
armour, the wolf head insignia stark
black on their auto-responsive
shoulder plates. Crossfire zigzagged
around them from the defended gates
ahead. The night air shimmered with
the heat distortion of weapons
discharge. Some kind of upright,
automated mortar was casting a
sluggish, flaccid stream of fat
munition charges over their heads.
‘Kill it!’ Loken heard Brother-
Sergeant Jubal instruct over the
link. Jubal’s order was given in
the curt argot of Cthonia, their
1,1,21
derivation world, a language that the
Luna Wolves had preserved as their
battle-tongue. The battle-brother
carrying the squad’s plasma cannon
obeyed without hesitation. For a
dazzling half-second, a twenty-metre
ribbon of light linked the muzzle of
his weapon to the auto-mortar, and
then the device engulfed the facade
of the palace in a roasting wash of
yellow flame. Dozens of enemy
soldiers were cast down by the blast.
Several were  thrown up into the air,
landing crumpled and boneless on the
flight of steps. ‘Into them!’
Jubal barked. Wildfire chipped and
pattered off their armour. Loken felt
the distant sting of it. Brother
1,1,22
Calends stumbled and fell, but
righted himself again, almost at
once. Loken saw the enemy scatter
away from their charge. He swung his
bolter up. His weapon had a gash in
the metal of the foregrip, the legacy
of a greenskin’s axe during
Ullanor, a cosmetic mark Loken had
told the armourers not to finish out.
He began to fire, not on burst, but
on single shot, feeling the weapon
buck and kick against his palms.
Bolter rounds were explosive
penetrators. The men he hit popped
like blisters, or shredded like
bursting fruit. Pink mist fumed off
every ruptured figure as it fell.
‘Tenth Company!’ Loken shouted.
1,1,23
‘For the Warmaster!’ The war cry
was still unfamiliar, just another
aspect of the newness. It was the
first time Loken had declaimed it in
war, the first chance he’d had
since the honour had been bestowed by
the Emperor after Ullanor. By the
Emperor. The true Emperor.
‘Lupercal! Lupercal!’ the Wolves
yelled back as they streamed in,
choosing to answer with the old cry,
the Legion’s pet-name for their
beloved commander. The warhorns of
the Titans boomed. They stormed the
palace. Loken paused by one of the
induction gates, urging his front-
runners in, carefully reviewing the
advance of his company main force.
1,1,24
Hellish fire continued to rake them
from the upper balconies and towers.
In the far distance, a brilliant dome
of light suddenly lifted into the
sky, astonishingly bright and vivid.
Loken’s visor automatically dimmed.
The ground trembled and a noise like
a thunderclap reached him. A capital
ship of some size, stricken and
ablaze, had fallen out of the sky and
impacted in the outskirts of the High
City. Drawn by the flash, the
phototropic towers above him fidgeted
and rotated. Reports flooded in.
Aximand’s force, Fifth Company, had
secured the Regency and the pavilions
on the ornamental lakes to the west
of the High City. Torgaddon’s men
1,1,25
were driving up through the lower
town, slaying the armour sent to
block them. Loken looked east. Three
kilometres away, across the flat
plain of the basalt platforms, across
the tide of charging men and striding
Titans and stitching fire,
Abaddon’s company, First Company,
was crossing the  bulwarks into the
far flank of the palace. Loken
magnified his view, resolving
hundreds of white-armoured figures
pouring through the smoke and
chopfire. At the front of them, the
dark figures of First Company’s
foremost Terminator squad, the
Justaerin. They wore polished black
armour, dark as night, as if they
1,1,26
belonged to some other, black Legion.
‘Loken to First,’ he sent.
‘Tenth has entry.’ There was a
pause, a brief distort, then
Abaddon’s voice answered. ‘Loken,
Loken… are you trying to shame me
with your diligence?’ ‘Not for a
moment, First Captain,’ Loken
replied. There was a strict hierarchy
of respect within the Legion, and
though he was a senior officer, Loken
regarded the peerless First Captain
with awe. All of the Mournival, in
fact, though Torgaddon had always
favoured Loken with genuine shows of
friendship. Now Sejanus was gone,
Loken thought. The aspect of the
Mournival would soon change. ‘I’m
1,1,27
playing with you, Loken,’ Abaddon
sent, his voice so deep that some
vowel sounds were blurred by the vox.
‘I’ll meet you at the feet of
this false Emperor. First one there
gets to illuminate him.’ Loken
fought back a smile. Ezekyle Abaddon
had seldom sported with him before.
He felt blessed, elevated. To be a
chosen man was enough, but to be in
with the favoured elite, that was
every captain’s dream. Reloading,
Loken entered the palace through the
induction gate, stepping over the
tangled corpses of the enemy dead.
The plaster facings of the inner
walls had been cracked and blown
down, and loose crumbs, like dry
1,1,28
sand, crunched under his feet. The
air was full of smoke, and his visor
display kept jumping from one
register to another as it attempted
to compensate and get a clean
reading. He moved down the inner
hall, hearing the echo of gunfire
from deeper in the palace compound.
The body of a brother lay slumped in
a doorway to his left, the large,
white-armoured corpse odd and out of
place amongst the smaller enemy
bodies. Marjex, one of the Legion’s
Apothecaries, was bending over him.
He glanced up as Loken approached,
and shook his head. ‘Who is it?’
Loken asked. ‘Tibor, of Second
Squad,’ Marjex replied. Loken
1,1,29
frowned as he saw the devastating
head wound that had stopped Tibor.
‘The Emperor knows his name,’
Loken said.  Marjex nodded, and
reached into his narthecium to get
the reductor tool. He was about to
remove Tibor’s precious gene-seed,
so that it might be returned to the
Legion banks. Loken left the
Apothecary to his work, and pushed on
down the hall. In a wide colonnade
ahead, the towering walls were
decorated with frescoes, showing
familiar scenes of a haloed Emperor
upon a golden throne. How blind these
people are, Loken thought, how sad
this is. One day, one single day with
the iterators, and they would
1,1,30
understand. We are not the enemy. We
are the same, and we bring with us a
glorious message of redemption. Old
Night is done. Man walks the stars
again, and the might of the Astartes
walks at his side to keep him safe.
In a broad, sloping tunnel of etched
silver, Loken caught up with elements
of Third Squad. Of all the units in
his company, Third Squad – Locasta
Tactical Squad – was his favourite
and his favoured. Its commander,
BrotherSergeant Nero Vipus, was his
oldest and truest friend. ‘How’s
your humour, captain?’ Vipus asked.
His pearl-white plate was smudged
with soot and streaked with blood.
‘Phlegmatic, Nero. You?’
1,1,31
‘Choleric. Red-raged, in fact.
I’ve just lost a man, and two more
of mine are injured. There’s
something covering the junction
ahead. Something heavy. Rate of fire
like you wouldn’t believe.’
‘Tried fragging it?’ ‘Two or
three grenades. No effect. And
there’s nothing to see. Garvi,
we’ve all heard about these so-
called Invisibles. The ones that
butchered Sejanus. I was
wondering–’ ‘Leave the
wondering to me,’ Loken said.
‘Who’s down?’ Vipus shrugged.
He was a little taller than Loken,
and his shrug made the heavy ribbing
and plates of his armour clunk
1,1,32
together. ‘Zakias.’ ‘Zakias?
No…’ ‘Torn into shreds before
my very eyes. Oh, I feel the hand of
the ship on me, Garvi.’ The hand of
the ship. An old saying. The
commander’s flagship was called the
Vengeful Spirit , and in times of
duress or loss, the Wolves liked to
draw upon all that implied as a
charm, a totem of retribution. ‘In
Zakias’s name,’ Vipus growled,
‘I’ll find this bastard Invisible
and–’ ‘Sooth your choler,
brother. I’ve no use for it,’
Loken said. ‘See to your  wounded
while I take a look.’ Vipus nodded
and redirected his men. Loken pushed
up past them to the disputed
1,1,33
junction. It was a vault-roofed
crossways where four hallways met.
The area read cold and still to his
imaging. Fading smoke wisped up into
the rafters. The ouslite floor had
been chewed and peppered with
thousands of impact craters. Brother
Zakias, his body as yet unretrieved,
lay in pieces at the centre of the
crossway, a steaming pile of
shattered white plasteel and bloody
meat. Vipus had been right. There was
no sign of an enemy present. No
heattrace, not even a flicker of
movement. But studying the area,
Loken saw a heap of empty shell
cases, glittering brass, that had
spilled out from behind a bulkhead
1,1,34
across from him. Was that where the
killer was hiding? Loken bent down
and picked up a chunk of fallen
plasterwork. He lobbed it into the
open. There was a click, and then a
hammering deluge of autofire raked
across the junction. It lasted five
seconds, and in that time over a
thousand rounds were expended. Loken
saw the fuming shell cases spitting
out from behind the bulkhead as they
were ejected. The firing stopped.
Fycelene vapour fogged the junction.
The gunfire had scored a mottled
gouge across the stone floor,
pummelling Zakias’s corpse in the
process. Spots of blood and scraps of
tissue had been spattered out. Loken
1,1,35
waited. He heard a whine and the
metallic clunk of an autoloader
system. He read weapon heat, fading,
but no body warmth. ‘Won a medal
yet?’ Vipus asked, approaching.
‘It’s just an automatic sentry
gun,’ Loken replied. ‘Well,
that’s a small relief at least,’
Vipus said. ‘After the grenades
we’ve pitched in that direction, I
was beginning to wonder if these
vaunted Invisibles might be
“Invulnerables” too. I’ll call
up Devastator support to–’
‘Just give me a light flare,’
Loken said. Vipus stripped one off
his leg plate and handed it to his
captain. Loken ignited it with a
1,1,36
twist of his hand, and threw it down
the hallway opposite. It bounced,
fizzling, glaring white hot, past the
hidden killer. There was a grind of
servos. The implacable gunfire began
to roar down the corridor at the
flare, kicking it and bouncing it,
ripping into the floor.
‘Garvi–’ Vipus began. Loken was
running. He crossed the junction,
thumped his back against the
bulkhead. The gun was still blazing.
He wheeled round the bulkhead and saw
the sentry gun, built into an alcove.
A squat machine, set on four pad feet
and heavily plated, it had turned its
short, fat, pumping cannons away from
him to fire on the distant,
1,1,37
flickering flare. Loken reached over
and tore out a handful of its servo
flexes. The guns stuttered and died.
‘We’re clear!’ Loken called
out. Locasta moved up. ‘That’s
generally called showing off,’
Vipus remarked. Loken led Locasta up
the corridor, and they entered a fine
state apartment. Other apartment
chambers, similarly regal, beckoned
beyond. It was oddly still and quiet.
‘Which way now?’ Vipus asked.
‘We go find this “Emperor”,’
Loken said. Vipus snorted. ‘Just
like that?’ ‘The First Captain
bet me I couldn’t reach him
first.’ ‘The First Captain, eh?
Since when was Garviel Loken on pally
1,1,38
terms with him?’ ‘Since Tenth
breached the palace ahead of First.
Don’t worry, Nero, I’ll remember
you little people when I’m
famous.’ Nero Vipus laughed, the
sound snuffling out of his helmet
mask like the cough of a consumptive
bull. What happened next didn’t
make either of them laugh at all.

1,1,39
TWO
 Meeting the Invisibles At the
foot of a Golden Throne Lupercal
‘Captain Loken?’ He looked up
from his work. ‘That’s me.’
‘Forgive me for interrupting,’
she said. ‘You’re busy.’ Loken
set aside the segment of armour he
had been polishing and rose to his
feet. He was almost a metre taller
than her, and naked but for a loin
cloth. She sighed inwardly at the
splendour of his physique. The
knotted muscles, the old ridge-scars.
He was handsome too, this one, fair
hair almost silver, cut short, his
pale skin slightly freckled, his eyes
grey like rain. What a waste, she
1,2,1
thought. Though there was no
disguising his inhumanity, especially
in this bared form. Apart from the
sheer mass of him, there was the
overgrown gigantism of the face, that
particular characteristic of the
Astartes, almost equine, plus the
hard, taut shell of his rib-less
torso, like stretched canvas. ‘I
don’t know who you are,’ he said,
dropping a nub of polishing fibre
into a little pot, and wiping his
fingers. She held out her hand.
‘Mersadie Oliton, official
remembrancer,’ she said. He looked
at her tiny hand and then shook it,
making it seem even more tiny in
comparison with his own giant fist.
1,2,2
‘I’m sorry,’ she said,
laughing, ‘I keep forgetting you
don’t do that out here. Shaking
hands, I mean. Such a parochial,
Terran custom.’ ‘I don’t mind
it. Have you come from Terra?’ ‘I
left there a year ago, despatched to
the crusade by permit of the
Council.’  ‘You’re a
remembrancer?’ ‘You know what
that means?’ ‘I’m not
stupid,’ Loken said. ‘Of course
not,’ she said, hurriedly. ‘I
meant no offence.’ ‘None
taken.’ He eyed her. Small and
frail, though possibly beautiful.
Loken had very little experience of
women. Perhaps they were all frail
1,2,3
and beautiful. He knew enough to know
that few were as black as her. Her
skin was like burnished coal. He
wondered if it were some kind of dye.
He wondered too about her skull. Her
head was bald, but not shaved. It
seemed polished and smooth as if it
had never known hair. The cranium was
enhanced somehow, extending back in a
streamlined sweep that formed a broad
ovoid behind her nape. It was like
she had been crowned, as if her
simple humanity had been made more
regal. ‘How can I help you?’ he
asked. ‘I understand you have a
story, a particularly entertaining
one. I’d like to remember it, for
posterity.’ ‘Which story?’
1,2,4
‘Horus killing the Emperor.’ He
stiffened. He didn’t like it when
non-Astartes humans called the
Warmaster by his true name. ‘That
happened months ago,’ he said
dismissively. ‘I’m sure I won’t
remember the details particularly
well.’ ‘Actually,’ she said,
‘I have it on good authority you
can be persuaded to tell the tale
quite expertly. I’ve been told
it’s very popular amongst your
battle-brothers.’ Loken frowned.
Annoyingly, the woman was correct.
Since the taking of the High City,
he’d been required – forced would
not be too strong a word – to
retell his first-hand account of the
1,2,5
events in the palace tower on dozens
of occasions. He presumed it was
because of Sejanus’s death. The
Luna Wolves needed catharsis. They
needed to hear how Sejanus had been
so singularly avenged. ‘Someone put
you up to this, Mistress Oliton?’
he asked. She shrugged. ‘Captain
Torgaddon, actually.’ Loken nodded.
It was usually him. ‘What do you
want to know?’ ‘I understand the
general situation, for I have heard
it from others, but I’d love to
have your personal observations. What
was it like? When you got  inside the
palace itself, what did you find?’
Loken sighed, and looked round at the
rack where his power armour was
1,2,6
displayed. He’d only just started
cleaning it. His private arming
chamber was a small, shadowy vault
adjoining the off-limits embarkation
deck, the metal walls lacquered pale
green. A cluster of glow-globes lit
the room, and an Imperial eagle had
been stencilled on one wall plate,
beneath which copies of Loken’s
various oaths of moment had been
pinned. The close air smelled of oils
and lapping powder. It was a
tranquil, introspective place, and
she had invaded that tranquility.
Becoming aware of her trespass, she
suggested, ‘I could come back
later, at a better time.’ ‘No,
now’s fine.’ He sat back down on
1,2,7
the metal stool where he had been
perching when she’d entered. ‘Let
me see… When we got inside the
palace, what we found was the
Invisibles.’ ‘Why were they
called that?’ she asked. ‘Because
we couldn’t see them,’ he
replied. The Invisibles were waiting
for them, and they well deserved
their sobriquet. Just ten paces into
the splendid apartments, the first
brother died. There was an odd, hard
bang, so hard it was painful to feel
and hear, and Brother Edrius fell to
his knees, then folded onto his side.
He had been struck in the face by
some form of energy weapon. The white
plasteel/ceramite alloy of his visor
1,2,8
and breastplate had actually deformed
into a rippled crater, like heated
wax that had flowed and then set
again. A second bang, a quick
concussive vibration of air,
obliterated an ornamental table
beside Nero Vipus. A third bang
dropped Brother Muriad, his left leg
shattered and snapped off like a reed
stalk. The science adepts of the
false Imperium had mastered and
harnessed some rare and wonderful
form of field technology, and armed
their elite guard with it. They
cloaked their bodies with a passive
application, twisting light to render
themselves invisible. And they were
able to project it in a merciless,
1,2,9
active form that struck with
mutilating force. Despite the fact
that they had been advancing combat-
ready and wary, Loken and the others
were taken completely off guard. The
Invisibles were even hidden to their
visor arrays. Several had simply been
standing in the  chamber, waiting to
strike. Loken began to fire, and
Vipus’s men did likewise. Raking
the area ahead of him, splintering
furniture, Loken hit something. He
saw pink mist kiss the air, and
something fell down with enough force
to overturn a chair. Vipus scored a
hit too, but not before Brother
Tarregus had been struck with such
power that his head was punched clean
1,2,10
off his shoulders. The cloak
technology evidently hid its users
best if they remained still. As they
moved, they became semi-visible,
heat-haze suggestions of men surging
to attack. Loken adapted quickly,
firing at each blemish of air. He
adjusted his visor gain to full
contrast, almost black and white, and
saw them better: hard outlines
against the fuzzy background. He
killed three more. In death, several
lost their cloaks. Loken saw the
Invisibles revealed as bloody
corpses. Their armour was silver,
ornately composed and machined with a
remarkable detail of patterning and
symbols. Tall, swathed in mantles of
1,2,11
red silk, the Invisibles reminded
Loken of the mighty Custodian Guard
that warded the Imperial Palace on
Terra. This was the bodyguard corps
which had executed Sejanus and his
glory squad at a mere nod from their
master. Nero Vipus was raging,
offended by the cost to his squad.
The hand of the ship was truly upon
him. He led the way, cutting a path
into a towering room beyond the scene
of the ambush. His fury gave Locasta
the opening it needed, but it cost
him his right hand, crushed by an
Invisible’s blast. Loken felt
choler too. Like Nero, the men of
Locasta were his friends. Rituals of
mourning awaited him. Even in the
1,2,12
darkness of Ullanor, victory had not
been so dearly bought. Charging past
Vipus, who was down on his knees,
groaning in pain as he tried to pluck
the mangled gauntlet off his ruined
hand, Loken entered a side chamber,
shooting at the air blemishes that
attempted to block him. A jolt of
force tore his bolter from his hands,
so he reached over his hip and drew
his chainsword from its scabbard. It
whined as it kicked into life. He
hacked at the faint outlines jostling
around him and felt the toothed blade
meet resistance. There was a shrill
scream. Gore drizzled out of nowhere
and plastered the chamber walls and
the front of Loken’s suit.
1,2,13
‘Lupercal!’ he grunted, and put
the full force of both arms behind
his strokes. Servos and mimetic
polymers, layered between his skin
and his suit’s outer plating to
form the musculature of his power
armour, bunched and flexed. He landed
a trio of two-handed blows. More
blood showered into  view. There was
a warbled shriek as loops of pink,
wet viscera suddenly became visible.
A moment later, the field screening
the soldier flickered and failed, and
revealed his disembowelled form,
stumbling away down the length of the
chamber, trying to hold his guts in
with both hands. Invisible force
stabbed at Loken again, scrunching
1,2,14
the edge of his left shoulder guard
and almost knocking him off his feet.
He rounded and swung the chainsword.
The blade struck something, and
shards of metal flew out. The shape
of a human figure, just out of joint
with the space it occupied, as if it
had been cut out of the air and
nudged slightly to the left, suddenly
filled in. One of the Invisibles, his
charged field sparking and crackling
around him as it died, became visible
and swung his long, bladed lance at
Loken. The blade rebounded off
Loken’s helm. Loken struck low with
his chainsword, ripping the lance out
of the Invisible’s silver gauntlets
and buckling its haft. At the same
1,2,15
time, Loken lunged, shoulder barging
the warrior against the chamber wall
so hard that the friable plaster of
the ancient frescoes crackled and
fell out. Loken stepped back. Winded,
his lungs and ribcage almost crushed
flat, the Invisible made a gagging,
sucking noise and fell down on his
knees, his head lolling forward.
Loken sawed his chainsword down and
sharply up again in one fluid,
practiced mercy stroke, and the
Invisible’s detached head bounced
away. Loken circled slowly, the
humming blade raised ready in his
right hand. The chamber floor was
slick with blood and black scraps of
meat. Shots rang out from nearby
1,2,16
rooms. Loken walked across the
chamber and retrieved his bolter,
hoisting it in his left fist with a
clatter. Two Luna Wolves entered the
chamber behind him, and Loken briskly
pointed them off into the left-hand
colonnade with a gesture of his
sword. ‘Form up and advance,’ he
snapped into his link. Voices
answered him. ‘Nero?’ ‘I’m
behind you, twenty metres.’
‘How’s the hand?’ ‘I left it
behind. It was getting in the way.’
Loken prowled forward. At the end of
the chamber, past the crumpled,
leaking body of the Invisible he had
disembowelled, sixteen broad marble
steps led up to a stone doorway. The
1,2,17
splendid stone frame was carved with
complex linenfold motifs.  Loken
ascended the steps slowly. Mottled
washes of light cast spastic flickers
through the open doorway. There was a
remarkable stillness. Even the din of
the fight engulfing the palace all
around seemed to recede. Loken could
hear the tiny taps made by the blood
dripping off his outstretched
chainsword onto the steps, a trail of
red beads up the white marble. He
stepped through the doorway. The
inner walls of the tower rose up
around him. He had evidently stepped
through into one of the tallest and
most massive of the palace’s
spires. A hundred metres in diameter,
1,2,18
a kilometre tall. No, more than that.
He’d come out on a wide, onyx
platform that encircled the tower,
one of several ring platforms
arranged at intervals up the height
of the structure, but there were more
below. Peering over, Loken saw as
much tower drop away into the depths
of the earth as stood proud above
him. He circled slowly, gazing
around. Great windows of glass or
some other transparent substance
glazed the tower from top to bottom
between the ring platforms, and
through them the light and fury of
the war outside flared and flashed.
No noise, just the flickering glow,
the sudden bursts of radiance. He
1,2,19
followed the platform round until he
found a sweep of curved stairs, flush
with the tower wall, that led up to
the next level. He began to ascend,
platform to platform, scanning for
any blurs of light that might betray
the presence of more Invisibles.
Nothing. No sound, no life, no
movement except the shimmer of light
from outside the windows as he passed
them. Five floors now, six. Loken
suddenly felt foolish. The tower was
probably empty. This search and purge
should have been left to others while
he marshalled Tenth Company’s main
force. Except… its ground-level
approach had been so furiously
protected. He looked up, pushing his
1,2,20
sensors hard. A third of a kilometre
above him, he fancied he caught a
brief sign of movement, a partial
heat-lock. ‘Nero?’ A pause.
‘Captain.’ ‘Where are you?’
‘Base of a tower. Heavy fighting.
We–’ There was a jumble of
noises, the distorted sounds of
gunfire and shouting. ‘Captain? Are
you still there?’ ‘Report!’
‘Heavy resistance. We’re locked
here! Where are–’  The link
broke. Loken hadn’t been about to
give away his position anyway. There
was something in this tower with him.
At the very top, something was
waiting. The penultimate deck. From
above came a soft creaking and
1,2,21
grinding, like the sails of a giant
windmill. Loken paused. At this
height, through the wide panes of
glass, he was afforded a view out
across the palace and the High City.
A sea of luminous smoke, underlit by
widespread firestorms. Some buildings
glowed pink, reflecting the light of
the inferno. Weapons flashed, and
energy beams danced and jumped in the
dark. Overhead, the sky was full of
fire too, a mirror of the ground. The
speartip had visited murderous
destruction upon the city of the
‘Emperor’. But had it found the
throat? He mounted the last flight of
steps, his grip on the weapons tight.
The uppermost ring platform formed
1,2,22
the base of the tower’s top
section, a vast cupola of crystal-
glass petals, ribbed together with
steel spars that curved up to form a
finial mast at the apex high above.
The entire structure creaked and
slid, turning slightly one way then
another as it responded
phototropically to the blooms of
light outside in the night. On one
side of the platform, its back to the
great windows, sat a golden throne.
It was a massive object, a heavy
plinth of three golden steps rising
to a vast gilt chair with a high back
and coiled arm rests. The throne was
empty. Loken lowered his weapons. He
saw that the tower top turned so that
1,2,23
the throne was always facing the
light. Disappointed, Loken took a
step towards the throne, and then
halted when he realised he wasn’t
alone after all. A solitary figure
stood away to his left, hands clasped
behind its back, staring out at the
spectacle of war. The figure turned.
It was an elderly man, dressed in a
floor-length mauve robe. His hair was
thin and white, his face thinner
still. He stared at Loken with
glittering, miserable eyes. ‘I defy
you,’ he said, his accent thick and
antique. ‘I defy you, invader.’
‘Your defiance is noted,’ Loken
replied, ‘but this fight is over. I
can see you’ve been watching its
1,2,24
progress from up here. You must know
that.’ ‘The Imperium of Man will
triumph over all its enemies,’ the
man replied. ‘Yes,’ said Loken.
‘Absolutely, it will. You have my
promise.’ The man faltered, as if
he did not quite understand.  ‘Am I
addressing the so-called
“Emperor”?’ Loken asked. He had
switched off and sheathed his sword,
but he kept his bolter up to cover
the robed figure. ‘So-called?’
the man echoed. ‘So-called? You
cheerfully blaspheme in this royal
place. The Emperor is the Emperor
Undisputed, saviour and protector of
the race of man. You are some
imposter, some evil daemon–’ ‘I
1,2,25
am a man like you.’ The other
scoffed. ‘You are an imposter. Made
like a giant, malformed and ugly. No
man would wage war upon his fellow
man like this.’ He gestured
disparagingly at the scene outside.
‘Your hostility started this,’
Loken said calmly. ‘You would not
listen to us or believe us. You
murdered our ambassadors. You brought
this upon yourself. We are charged
with the reunification of mankind,
throughout the stars, in the name of
the Emperor. We seek to establish
compliance amongst all the
fragmentary and disparate strands.
Most greet us like the lost brothers
we are. You resisted.’ ‘You came
1,2,26
to us with lies!’ ‘We came with
the truth.’ ‘Your truth is
obscenity!’ ‘Sir, the truth
itself is amoral. It saddens me that
we believe the same words, the very
same ones, but value them so
differently. That difference has led
directly to this bloodshed.’ The
elderly man sagged, deflated. ‘You
could have left us alone.’
‘What?’ Loken asked. ‘If our
philosophies are so much at odds, you
could have passed us by and left us
to our lives, unviolated. Yet you did
not. Why? Why did you insist on
bringing us to ruin? Are we such a
threat to you?’ ‘Because the
truth–’ Loken began. ‘–is
1,2,27
amoral. So you said, but in serving
your fine truth, invader, you make
yourself immoral.’ Loken was
surprised to find he didn’t know
quite how to answer. He took a step
forward and said, ‘I request you
surrender to me, sir.’ ‘You are
the commander, I take it?’ the
elderly man asked. ‘I command Tenth
Company.’ ‘You are not the
overall commander, then? I assumed
you were, as you entered this place
ahead of your troops. I was waiting
for the overall  commander. I will
submit to him, and to him alone.’
‘The terms of your surrender are
not negotiable.’ ‘Will you not
even do that for me? Will you not
1,2,28
even do me that honour? I would stay
here, until your lord and master
comes in person to accept my
submission. Fetch him.’ Before
Loken could reply, a dull wail echoed
up into the tower top, gradually
increasing in volume. The elderly man
took a step or two backwards, fear
upon his face. The black figures rose
up out of the tower’s depths,
ascending slowly, vertically, up
through the open centre of the ring
platform. Ten Astartes warriors, the
blue heat of their whining jump pack
burners shimmering the air behind
them. Their power armour was black,
trimmed with white. Catulan Reaver
Squad, First Company’s veteran
1,2,29
assault pack. First in, last out. One
by one, they came in to land on the
edge of the ring platform,
deactivating their jump packs. Kalus
Ekaddon, Catulan’s captain, glanced
sidelong at Loken. ‘The First
Captain’s compliments, Captain
Loken. You beat us to it after
all.’ ‘Where is the First
Captain?’ Loken asked. ‘Below,
mopping up,’ Ekaddon replied. He
set his vox to transmit. ‘This is
Ekaddon, Catulan. We have secured the
false emperor–’ ‘No,’ said
Loken firmly. Ekaddon looked at him
again. His visor lenses were stern
and unreflective jet glass set in the
black metal of his helmet mask. He
1,2,30
bowed slightly. ‘My apologies,
captain,’ he said, archly. ‘The
prisoner and the honour are yours, of
course.’ ‘That’s not what I
meant,’ Loken replied. ‘This man
demands the right to surrender in
person to our commander-in-chief.’
Ekaddon snorted, and several of his
men laughed. ‘This bastard can
demand all he likes, captain,’
Ekaddon said, ‘but he’s going to
be cruelly disappointed.’ ‘We are
dismantling an ancient empire,
Captain Ekaddon,’ Loken said
firmly. ‘Might we not display some
measure of gracious respect in the
execution of that act? Or are we just
barbarians?’ ‘He murdered
1,2,31
Sejanus!’ spat one of Ekaddon’s
men. ‘He did,’ Loken agreed.
‘So should we just murder him in
response? Didn’t  the Emperor,
praise be his name, teach us always
to be magnanimous in victory?’
‘The Emperor, praise be his name,
is not with us,’ Ekaddon replied.
‘If he’s not with us in spirit,
captain,’ Loken replied, ‘then I
pity the future of this crusade.’
Ekaddon stared at Loken for a moment,
then ordered his second to transmit a
signal to the fleet. Loken was quite
sure Ekaddon had not backed down
because he’d been convinced by any
argument or fine principle. Though
Ekaddon, as Captain of First
1,2,32
Company’s assault elite, had glory
and favour on his side, Loken, a
company captain, had superiority of
rank. ‘A signal has been sent to
the Warmaster,’ Loken told the
elderly man. ‘Is he coming here?
Now?’ the man asked eagerly.
‘Arrangements will be made for you
to meet him,’ Ekaddon snapped. They
waited for a minute or two for a
signal response. Astartes attack
ships, their engines glowing,
streaked past the windows. The light
from huge detonations sheeted the
southern skies and slowly died away.
Loken watched the criss-cross shadows
play across the ring platform in the
dying light. He started. He suddenly
1,2,33
realised why the elderly man had
insisted so furiously that the
commander should come in person to
this place. He clamped his bolter to
his side and began to stride towards
the empty throne. ‘What are you
doing?’ the elderly man asked.
‘Where is he?’ Loken cried.
‘Where is he really? Is he
invisible too?’ ‘Get back!’ the
elderly man cried out, leaping
forward to grapple with Loken. There
was a loud bang. The elderly man’s
ribcage blew out, spattering blood,
tufts of burned silk and shreds of
meat in all directions. He swayed,
his robes shredded and on fire, and
pitched over the edge of the
1,2,34
platform. Limbs limp, his torn
garments flapping, he fell away like
a stone down the open drop of the
palace tower. Ekaddon lowered his
bolt pistol. ‘I’ve never killed
an emperor before,’ he laughed.
‘That wasn’t the Emperor,’
Loken yelled. ‘You moron! The
Emperor’s been here all the
time.’ He was close to the empty
throne now, reaching out a hand to
grab at one of the golden armrests. A
blemish of light, almost perfect, but
not so perfect that shadows behaved
correctly around it, recoiled in the
seat.  . Those four words were the
next that Loken was going to This is
a trap utter. He never got the
1,2,35
chance. The golden throne trembled
and broadcast a shockwave of
invisible force. It was a power like
that which the elite guard had
wielded, but a hundred times more
potent. It slammed out in all
directions, casting Loken and all the
Catulan off their feet like corn
sheaves in a hurricane. The windows
of the tower top shattered outwards
in a multicoloured blizzard of glass
fragments. Most of Catulan Reaver
Squad simply vanished, blown out of
the tower, arms flailing, on the bow-
wave of energy. One struck a steel
spar on his way out. Back snapped,
his body tumbled away into the night
like a broken doll. Ekaddon managed
1,2,36
to grab hold of another spar as he
was launched backwards. He clung on,
plasteel digits sinking into the
metal for purchase, legs trailing out
behind him horizontally as air and
glass and gravitic energy assaulted
him. Loken, too close to the foot of
the throne to be caught by the full
force of the shockwave, was knocked
flat. He slid across the ring
platform towards the open fall, his
white armour shrieking as it left
deep grooves in the onyx surface. He
went over the edge, over the sheer
drop, but the wall of force carried
him on like a leaf across the hole
and slammed him hard against the far
lip of the ring. He grabbed on, his
1,2,37
arms over the lip, his legs dangling,
held in place as much by the shock
pressure as by the strength of his
own, desperate arms. Almost blacking
out from the relentless force, he
fought to hold on. Inchoate light,
green and dazzling, sputtered into
being on the platform in front of his
clawing hands. The teleport flare
became too bright to behold, and then
died, revealing a god standing on the
edge of the platform. The god was a
true giant, as large again to any
Astartes warrior as an Astartes was
to a normal man. His armour was white
gold, like the sunlight at dawn, the
work of master artificers. Many
symbols covered its surfaces, the
1,2,38
chief of which was the motif of a
single, staring eye fashioned across
the breastplate. Robes of white cloth
fluttered out behind the terrible,
haloed figure. Above the breastplate,
the face was bare, grimacing, perfect
in every dimension and detail,
suffused in radiance. So beautiful.
So very beautiful. For a moment, the
god stood there, unflinching, beset
by the gale of force, but unmoving,
facing it down. Then he raised the
storm bolter in his right  hand and
fired into the tumult. One shot. The
echo of the detonation rolled around
the tower. There was a choking
scream, half lost in the uproar, and
then the uproar itself stilled
1,2,39
abruptly. The wall of force died
away. The hurricane faded. Splinters
of glass tinkled as they rained back
down onto the platform. No longer
impelled, Ekaddon crashed back down
against the blown-out sill of the
window frame. His grip was secure. He
clawed his way back inside and got to
his feet. ‘My lord!’ he
exclaimed, and dropped to one knee,
his head bowed. With the pressure
lapsed, Loken found he could no
longer support himself. Hands
grappling, he began to slide back
over the lip where he had been
hanging. He couldn’t get any
purchase on the gleaming onyx. He
slipped off the edge. A strong hand
1,2,40
grabbed him around the wrist and
hauled him up onto the platform.
Loken rolled over, shaking. He looked
back across the ring at the golden
throne. It was a smoking ruin, its
secret mechanisms exploded from
within. Amidst the twisted, ruptured
plates and broken workings, a
smouldering corpse sat upright, teeth
grinning from a blackened skull,
charred, skeletal arms still braced
along the throne’s coiled rests.
‘So will I deal with all tyrants
and deceivers,’ rumbled a deep
voice. Loken looked up at the god
standing over him. ‘Lupercal…’
he murmured. The god smiled. ‘Not
so formal, please, captain,’
1,2,41
whispered Horus. ‘May I ask you a
question?’ Mersadie Oliton said.
Loken had taken a robe down from a
wall peg and was putting it on. ‘Of
course.’ ‘Could we not have just
left them alone?’ ‘No. Ask a
better question.’ ‘Very well.
What is he like?’ ‘What is who
like, lady?’ he asked. ‘Horus.’
‘If you have to ask, you’ve not
met him,’ he said. ‘No, I
haven’t yet, captain. I’ve been
waiting for an audience. Still, I
would like to know what you think of
Horus–’  ‘I think he is
Warmaster,’ Loken said. His tone
was stone hard. ‘I think he is the
master of the Luna Wolves and the
1,2,42
chosen proxy of the Emperor, praise
be his name, in all our undertakings.
He is the first and foremost of all
primarchs. And I think I take offence
when a mortal voices his name without
respect or title.’ ‘Oh!’ she
said. ‘I’m sorry, captain, I
meant no–’ ‘I’m sure you
didn’t, but he is Warmaster Horus.
You’re a remembrancer. Remember
that.’  
1,2,43
THREE
 Replevin Amongst the
remembrancers Raised to the four
Three months after the battle for the
High City, the first of the
remembrancers had joined the
expedition fleet, brought directly
from Terra by mass conveyance.
Various chroniclers and recorders
had, of course, been accompanying
Imperial forces since the
commencement of the Great Crusade,
two hundred sidereal years earlier.
But they had been individuals, mostly
volunteers or accidental witnesses,
gathered up like road dust on the
advancing wheels of the crusader
hosts, and the records they had made
1,3,1
had been piecemeal and irregular.
They had commemorated events by
happenstance, sometimes inspired by
their own artistic appetites,
sometimes encouraged by the patronage
of a particular primarch or lord
commander, who thought it fit to have
his deeds immortalised in verse or
text or image or composition.
Returning to Terra after the victory
of Ullanor, the Emperor had decided
it was time a more formal and
authoritative celebration of
mankind’s reunification be
undertaken. The fledgling Council of
Terra evidently agreed
wholeheartedly, for the bill
inaugurating the foundation and
1,3,2
sponsorship of the remembrancer order
had been countersigned by no less a
person than Malcador the Sigillite,
First Lord of the Council. Recruited
from all levels of Terran society –
and from the societies of other key
Imperial worlds – simply on the
merit of their creative gifts, the
remembrancers were quickly accredited
and assigned, and despatched to join
all the key expedition fleets active
in the expanding Imperium.  At that
time, according to War Council logs,
there were four thousand two hundred
and eighty-seven primary expedition
fleets engaged upon the business of
the crusade, as well as sixty
thousand odd secondary deployment
1,3,3
groups involved in compliance or
occupation endeavours, with a further
three hundred and seventy-two primary
expeditions in regroup and refit, or
resupplying as they awaited new
tasking orders. Almost four point
three million remembrancers were sent
abroad in the first months following
the ratification of the bill. ‘Arm
the bastards,’ Primarch Russ had
been reported as saying, ‘and they
might win a few bloody worlds for us
in between verses.’ Russ’s sour
attitude reflected well the demeanor
of the martial class. From primarch
down to common army soldier, there
was a general unease about the
Emperor’s decision to quit the
1,3,4
crusade campaign and retire to the
solitude of his palace on Terra. No
one had questioned the choice of
First Primarch Horus as Warmaster to
act in his stead. They simply
questioned the need for a proxy at
all. The formation of the Council of
Terra had come as more unpleasant
news. Since the inception of the
Great Crusade, the War Council,
formed principally of the Emperor and
the primarchs, had been the epicentre
of Imperial authority. Now, this new
body supplanted it, taking up the
reins of Imperial governance, a body
composed of civilians instead of
warriors. The War Council, left under
Horus’s leadership, effectively
1,3,5
became relegated to a satellite
status, its responsibilities focused
on the campaign and the campaign
alone. For no crime of their own, the
remembrancers, most of them eager and
excited at the prospect of the work
ahead, found themselves the focus of
that discontent everywhere they went.
They were not welcomed, and they
found their commission hard to
fulfil. Only later, when the eaxector
tributi administrators began to visit
expedition fleets, did the discontent
find a better, truer target to
exercise itself upon. So, three
months after the battle of the High
City, the remembrancers arrived to a
cold welcome. None of them had known
1,3,6
what to expect. Most had never been
off-world before. They were virgin
and innocent, over-eager and gauche.
It didn’t take long for them to
become hardened and cynical at their
reception. When they arrived, the
fleet of the 63rd Expedition still
encircled the  capital world. The
process of replevin had begun, as the
Imperial forces sectioned the
‘Imperium’, dismantled its
mechanisms, and bestowed its various
properties upon the Imperial
commanders chosen to oversee its
dispersal. Aid ships were flocking
down from the fleet to the surface,
and hosts of the Imperial Army had
been deployed to effect police
1,3,7
actions. Central resistance had
collapsed almost overnight following
the ‘Emperor’s’ death, but
fighting continued to spasm amongst
some of the western cities, as well
as on three of the other worlds in
the system. Lord Commander Varvaras,
an honourable, ‘old school’
veteran, was the commander of the
army forces attached to the
expedition fleet, and not for the
first time he found himself
organising an effort to pick up the
pieces behind an Astartes speartip.
‘A body often twitches as it
dies,’ he remarked philosophically
to the Master of the Fleet.
‘We’re just making sure it’s
1,3,8
dead.’ The Warmaster had agreed to
a state funeral for the
‘Emperor’. He declared it only
right and proper, and sympathetic to
the desires of a people they wished
to bring to compliance rather than
crush wholesale. Voices were raised
in objection, particularly as the
ceremonial interment of Hastur
Sejanus had only just taken place,
along with the formal burials of the
battle-brothers lost at the High
City. Several Legion officers,
including Abaddon himself, refused
point blank to allow his forces to
attend any funeral rites for the
killer of Sejanus. The Warmaster
understood this, but fortunately
1,3,9
there were other Astartes amongst the
expedition who could take their
place. Primarch Dorn, escorted by two
companies of his Imperial Fists, the
VII Legion, had been travelling with
the 63rd Expedition for eight months,
while Dorn conducted talks with the
Warmaster about future War Council
policies. Because the Imperial Fists
had taken no part in the annexation
of the planet, Rogal Dorn agreed to
have his companies stand tribute at
the ‘Emperor’s’ funeral. He did
this so that the Luna Wolves would
not have to tarnish their honour.
Gleaming in their yellow plate, the
Imperial Fists silently lined the
route of the ‘Emperor’s’
1,3,10
cortege as it wound its way through
the battered avenues of the High City
to the necropolis. By order of the
Warmaster, bending to the will of the
chief captains and, most especially,
the Mournival, no remembrancers were
permitted to attend.  Ignace Karkasy
wandered into the retiring room and
sniffed at a decanter of wine. He
made a face. ‘It’s fresh
opened,’ Keeler told him sourly.
‘Yes, but local vintage,’ Karkasy
replied. ‘This petty little empire.
No wonder it fell so easily. Any
culture founded upon a wine so tragic
shouldn’t survive long.’ ‘It
lasted five thousand years, through
the limits of Old Night,’ Keeler
1,3,11
said. ‘I doubt the quality of its
wine influenced its survival.’
Karkasy poured himself a glass,
sipped it and frowned. ‘All I can
say is that Old Night must have
seemed much longer here than it
actually was.’ Euphrati Keeler
shook her head and turned back to her
work, cleaning and refitting a hand-
held picter unit of very high
quality. ‘And then there’s the
matter of sweat,’ Karkasy said. He
sat down on a lounger and put his
feet up, settling the glass on his
wide chest. He sipped again,
grimacing, and rested his head back.
Karkasy was a tall man, generously
upholstered in flesh. His garments
1,3,12
were expensive and welltailored to
suit his bulk. His round face was
framed by a shock of black hair.
Keeler sighed and looked up from her
work. ‘The what?’ ‘The sweat,
dear Euphrati, the sweat! I have been
observing the Astartes. Very big,
aren’t they? I mean to say, very
big in every measurement by which one
might quantify a man.’ ‘They’re
Astartes, Ignace. What did you
expect?’ ‘Not sweat, that’s
what. Not such a rank, pervasive
reek. They are our immortal
champions, after all. I expected them
to smell rather better. Fragrant,
like young gods.’ ‘Ignace, I have
no clue how you got certified.’
1,3,13
Karkasy grinned. ‘Because of the
beauty of my lyric, my dear, because
of my mastery of words. Although that
might be found wanting here. How may
I begin…? ‘The Astartes save us
from the brink, the brink, But oh my
life how they stink, they stink.’
Karkasy sniggered, pleased with
himself. He waited for a response,
but Keeler was too occupied with her
work. ‘Dammit!’ Keeler
complained, throwing down her
delicate tools. ‘Servitor? Come
here.’ One of the waiting servitors
stalked up to her on thin, piston
legs. She held  out her picter.
‘This mechanism is jammed. Take it
for repair. And fetch me my spare
1,3,14
units.’ ‘Yes, mistress,’ the
servitor croaked, taking the device.
It plodded away. Keeler poured
herself a glass of wine from the
decanter and went to lean at the
rail. Below, on the sub-deck, most of
the expedition’s other
remembrancers were assembling for
luncheon. Three hundred and fifty men
and women gathered around formally
laid tables, servitors moving amongst
them, offering drinks. A gong was
sounding. ‘Is that lunch
already?’ Karkasy asked from the
lounger. ‘Yes,’ she said. ‘And
is it going to be one of the damned
iterators hosting again?’ he
queried. ‘Yes. Sindermann yet
1,3,15
again. The topic is promulgation of
the living truth.’ Karkasy settled
back and tapped his glass. ‘I think
I’ll take luncheon here,’ he
said. ‘You’re a bad man,
Ignace,’ Keeler laughed. ‘But I
think I’ll join you.’ Keeler sat
down on the chaise facing him, and
settled back. She was tall, lean-
limbed and blonde, her face pale and
slender. She wore chunky army boots
and fatigue breeches, with a black
combat jacket open to show a white
vest, like a cadet officer, but the
very masculinity of her chosen garb
made her feminine beauty all the more
apparent. ‘I could write a whole
epic about you,’ Karkasy said,
1,3,16
gazing. Keeler snorted. It had become
a daily routine for him to make a
pass at her. ‘I’ve told you,
I’m not interested in your
wretched, pawing approaches.’
‘Don’t you like men?’ he asked,
tilting his reclined head on one
side. ‘Why?’ ‘You dress like
one.’ ‘So do you. Do you like
men?’ Karkasy made a pained
expression and sat back again,
fiddling with the glass on his chest.
He stared up at the heroic figures
painted on the roof of the mezzanine.
He had no idea what they were
supposed to represent. Some great act
of triumph that clearly had involved
a great deal of standing on the
1,3,17
bodies of the slain with arms thrust
into the sky whilst shouting. ‘Is
this how you expected it to be?’ he
asked quietly. ‘What?’ ‘When
you were selected,’ he said.
‘When they contacted me, I felt
so…’  ‘So what?’ ‘So…
proud, I suppose. I imagined so much.
I thought I would set foot amongst
the stars and become a part of
mankind’s finest moment. I thought
I would be uplifted, and thus produce
my finest works.’ ‘And you’re
not?’ Keeler asked. ‘The beloved
warriors we’ve been sent here to
glorify couldn’t be less helpful if
they tried.’ ‘I’ve had some
success,’ Keeler said. ‘I was
1,3,18
down on the assembly deck earlier,
and captured some fine images. I’ve
put in a request to be allowed
transit to the surface. I want to see
the war zone first-hand.’ ‘Good
luck. They’ll probably deny you.
Every request for access I’ve made
has been turned down.’ ‘They’re
warriors, Ig. They’ve been warriors
for a long time. They resent the
likes of us. We’re just passengers,
along for the ride, univited.’
‘You got your shots,’ he said.
Keeler nodded. ‘They don’t seem
to mind me.’ ‘That’s because
you dress like a man,’ he smiled.
The hatch slid open and a figure
joined them in the quiet mezzanine
1,3,19
chamber. Mersadie Oliton went
directly to the table where the
decanter sat, poured herself a drink,
and knocked it back. Then she stood,
silently, gazing out at the drifting
stars beyond the barge’s vast
window ports. ‘What’s up with her
now?’ Karkasy ventured.
‘Sadie?’ Keeler asked, getting to
her feet and setting her glass down.
‘What happened?’ ‘Apparently, I
just offended someone,’ Oliton said
quickly, pouring another drink.
‘Offended? Who?’ Keeler asked.
‘Some haughty Space Marine bastard
called Loken. Bastard!’ ‘You got
time with Loken?’ Karkasy asked,
sitting up rapidly and swinging his
1,3,20
feet to the deck. ‘Loken? Tenth
Company Captain Loken?’ ‘Yes,’
Oliton said. ‘Why?’ ‘I’ve
been trying to get near him for a
month now,’ Karkasy said. ‘Of all
the captains, they say, he is the
most steadfast, and he’s to take
Sejanus’s place, according to the
rumour mill. How did you get
authorisation?’ ‘I didn’t,’
Oliton said. ‘I was finally given
credentials for a brief interview
with Captain Torgaddon, which I
counted as no small success in
itself, given  the days I’ve spent
petitioning to meet him, but I
don’t think he was in the mood to
talk to me. When I went to see him at
1,3,21
the appointed time, his equerry
turned up instead and told me
Torgaddon was busy. Torgaddon had
sent the equerry to take me to see
Loken. “Loken’s got a good
story,” he said.’ ‘Was it a
good story?’ Keeler asked. Mersadie
nodded. ‘Best I’ve heard, but I
said something he didn’t like, and
he turned on me. Made me feel this
small.’ She gestured with her hand,
and then took another swig. ‘Did he
smell of sweat?’ Karkasy asked.
‘No. No, not at all. He smelled of
oils. Very sweet and clean.’ ‘Can
you get me an introduction?’ asked
Ignace Karkasy. He heard footsteps,
then a voice called his name.
1,3,22
‘Garvi?’ Loken looked around from
his sword drill and saw, through the
bars of the cage, Nero Vipus framed
in the doorway of the blade-school.
Vipus was dressed in black breeches,
boots and a loose vest, and his
truncated arm was very evident. The
missing hand had been bagged in
sterile jelly, and nanotic serums
injected to reform the wrist so it
would accept an augmetic implant in a
week or so. Loken could still see the
scars where Vipus had used his
chainsword to amputate his own hand.
‘What?’ ‘Someone to see you,’
Vipus said. ‘If it’s another damn
remembrancer–’ Loken began. Vipus
shook his head. ‘It’s not. It’s
1,3,23
Captain Torgaddon.’ Loken lowered
his blade and deactivated the
practice cage as Vipus drew aside.
The target dummies and armature
blades went dead around him, and the
upper hemisphere of the cage slid
into the roof space as the lower
hemisphere retracted into the deck
beneath the mat. Tarik Torgaddon
entered the blade-school chamber,
dressed in fatigues and a long coat
of silver mail. His features were
saturnine, his hair black. He grinned
at Vipus as the latter slipped out
past him. Torgaddon’s grin was full
of perfect white teeth. ‘Thanks,
Vipus. How’s the hand?’
‘Mending, captain. Fit to be
1,3,24
rebonded.’ ‘That’s good,’
said Torgaddon. ‘Wipe your arse
with the other one for a  while, all
right? Carry on.’ Vipus laughed and
disappeared. Torgaddon chuckled at
his own quip and climbed the short
steps to face Loken in the middle of
the canvas mat. He paused at a blade
rack outside the opened cage,
selected a long-handled axe, and drew
it out, hacking the air with it as he
advanced. ‘Hello, Garviel,’ he
said. ‘You’ve heard the rumour, I
suppose?’ ‘I’ve heard all sorts
of rumours, sir.’ ‘I mean the one
about you. Take a guard.’ Loken
tossed his practice blade onto the
deck and quickly drew a tabar from
1,3,25
the nearest rack. It was all-steel,
blade and handle both, and the
cutting edge of the axe head had a
pronounced curve. He raised it in a
hunting stance and took up position
facing Torgaddon. Torgaddon feinted,
then smote in with two furious chops.
Loken deflected Torgaddon’s axe
head with the haft of his tabar, and
the blade-school rang with chiming
echoes. The smile had not left
Torgaddon’s face. ‘So, this
rumour…’ he continued, circling.
‘This rumour,’ Loken nodded.
‘Is it true?’ ‘No,’ said
Torgaddon. Then he grinned impishly.
‘Of course it bloody is! Or maybe
it’s not… No, it is.’ He
1,3,26
laughed loudly at the mischief.
‘That’s funny,’ said Loken.
‘Oh, belt up and smile,’
Torgaddon hissed, and scythed in
again, striking at Loken with two
very non-standard cross-swings that
Loken had trouble dodging. He was
forced to spin his body out of the
way and land with his feet wide-
braced. ‘Interesting work,’ Loken
said, circling again, his tabar low
and loose. ‘Are you, may I ask,
just making these moves up?’
Torgaddon grinned. ‘Taught to me by
the Warmaster himself,’ he said,
pacing around and allowing the long
axe to spin in his fingers. The blade
flashed in the glow of the
1,3,27
downlighters aimed on the canvas. He
halted suddenly, and aimed the head
of the axe at Loken. ‘Don’t you
want this, Garviel? Terra, I put you
up for this myself.’ ‘I’m
honoured, sir. I thank you for
that.’ ‘And it was seconded by
Ekaddon.’ Loken raised his
eyebrows. ‘All right, no it
wasn’t. Ekaddon hates your guts, my
friend.’  ‘The feeling is
mutual.’ ‘That’s the boy,’
Torgaddon roared, and lunged at
Loken. Loken smashed the hack away,
and counter-chopped, forcing
Torgaddon to leap back onto the edges
of the mat. ‘Ekaddon’s an
arse,’ Torgaddon said, ‘and he
1,3,28
feels cheated you got there first.’
‘I only–’ Loken began.
Torgaddon raised a finger for
silence. ‘You got there first,’
he said quietly, not joking any more,
‘and you saw the truth of it.
Ekaddon can go hang, he’s just
smarting. Abaddon seconded you for
this.’ ‘The First Captain?’
Torgaddon nodded. ‘He was
impressed. You beat him to the punch.
Glory to the Tenth. And the vote was
decided by the Warmaster.’ Loken
lowered his guard completely. ‘The
Warmaster?’ ‘He wants you in.
Told me to tell you that himself. He
appreciated your work. He admired
your sense of honour. “Tarik,” he
1,3,29
said to me, “if anyone’s going to
take Sejanus’s place, it should be
Loken.” That’s what he said.’
‘Did he?’ ‘No.’ Loken looked
up. Torgaddon was coming at him with
his axe high and whirling. Loken
ducked, side-stepped, and thumped the
butt of his tabar’s haft into
Torgaddon’s side, causing Torgaddon
to mis-step and stumble. Torgaddon
exploded in laughter. ‘Yes! Yes, he
did. Terra, you’re too easy, Garvi.
Too easy. The look on your face!’
Loken smiled thinly. Torgaddon looked
at the axe in his hand, and then
tossed it aside, as if suddenly bored
with the whole thing. It landed with
a clatter in the shadows off the mat.
1,3,30
‘So what do you say?’ Torgaddon
asked. ‘What do I tell them? Are
you in?’ ‘Sir, it would be the
finest honour of my life,’ Loken
said. Torgaddon nodded and smiled.
‘Yes, it would,’ he said, ‘and
here’s your first lesson. You call
me Tarik.’ It was said that the
iterators were selected via a process
even more rigorous and scrupulous
than the induction mechanisms of the
Astartes. ‘One man in a thousand
might become a Legion warrior,’ so
the sentiment went, ‘but only  one
in a hundred thousand is fit to be an
iterator.’ Loken could believe
that. A prospective Astartes had to
be sturdy, fit, genetically
1,3,31
receptive, and ripe for enhancement.
A chassis of meat and bone upon which
a warrior could be built. But to be
an iterator, a person had to have
certain rare gifts that belied
enhancement. Insight, articulacy,
political genius, keen intelligence.
The latter could be boosted, either
digitally or pharmaceutically, of
course, and a mind could be tutored
in history, ethic-politics and
rhetoric. A person could be taught
what to think, and how to express
that line of thought, but he
couldn’t be taught howto think.
Loken loved to watch the iterators at
work. On occasions, he had delayed
the withdrawal of his company so that
1,3,32
he could follow their functionaries
around conquered cities and watch as
they addressed the crowds. It was
like watching the sun come out across
a field of wheat. Kyril Sindermann
was the finest iterator Loken had
ever seen. Sindermann held the post
of Primary Iterator in the 63rd
Expedition, and was responsible for
the shaping of the message. He had,
it was well known, a deep and
intimate friendship with the
Warmaster, as well as the expedition
master and the senior equerries. And
his name was known by the Emperor
himself. Sindermann was finishing a
briefing in the School of Iterators
when Loken strayed into the audience
1,3,33
hall, a long vault set deep in the
belly of the . Two thousand men and
women, each dressed in the simple,
Vengeful Spirit beige robes of their
office, sat in the banks of tiered
seating, rapt by his every word.
‘To sum up, for I’ve been
speaking far too long,’ Sindermann
was saying, ‘this recent episode
allows us to observe genuine blood
and sinew beneath the wordy skin of
our philosophy. The truth we convey
is the truth, because we say it is
the truth. Is that enough?’ He
shrugged. ‘I don’t believe so.
“My truth is better than your
truth” is a school-yard squabble,
not the basis of a culture. “I am
1,3,34
right, so you are wrong” is a
syllogism that collapses as soon as
one applies any of a number of
fundamental ethical tools. I am
right, ergo, you are wrong. We
can’t construct a constitution on
that, and we cannot, should not, will
not be persuaded to iterate on its
basis. It would make us what?’ He
looked out across his audience. A
number of hands were raised.
‘There?’ ‘Liars.’ Sindermann
smiled. His words were being
amplified by the array of voxmics set
around his podium, and his face
magnified by picter onto the
hololithic wall behind him. On the
wall, his smile was three metres
1,3,35
wide. ‘I was thinking bullies, or
demagogues, Memed, but “liars” is
apt. In fact, it cuts deeper than my
suggestions. Well done. Liars. That
is the one thing we iterators can
never allow ourselves to become.’
Sindermann took a sip of water before
continuing. Loken, at the back of the
hall, sat down in an empty seat.
Sindermann was a tall man, tall for a
nonAstartes at any rate, proudly
upright, spare, his patrician head
crowned by fine white hair. His
eyebrows were black, like the chevron
markings on a Luna Wolf shoulder
plate. He had a commanding presence,
but it was his voice that really
mattered. Pitched deep, rounded,
1,3,36
mellow, compassionate, it was the
vocal tone that got every iterator
candidate selected. A soft,
delicious, clean voice that
communicated reason and sincerity and
trust. It was a voice worth searching
through one hundred thousand people
to find. ‘Truth and lies,’
Sindermann continued. ‘Truth and
lies. I’m on my hobbyhorse now, you
realise? Your supper will be
delayed.’ A ripple of amusement
washed across the hall. ‘Great
actions have shaped our society,’
Sindermann said. ‘The greatest of
these, physically, has been the
Emperor’s formal and complete
unification of Terra, the outward
1,3,37
sequel to which, this Great Crusade,
we are now engaged upon. But the
greatest, intellectually, has been
our casting off of that heavy mantle
called religion. Religion damned our
species for thousands of years, from
the lowest superstition to the
highest conclaves of spiritual faith.
It drove us to madness, to war, to
murder, it hung upon us like a
disease, like a shackle ball. I’ll
tell you what religion was… No, you
tell me. You, there?’ ‘Ignorance,
sir.’ ‘Thank you, Khanna.
Ignorance. Since the earliest times,
our species has striven to understand
the workings of the cosmos, and where
that understanding has failed, or
1,3,38
fallen short, we have filled in the
gaps, plastered over the
discrepancies, with blind faith. Why
does the sun go round the sky? I
don’t know, so I will attribute it
to the efforts of a sun god with a
golden chariot. Why do people die? I
can’t say, but I will choose to
believe it is the murky business of a
reaper who carries souls to some
afterworld.’  His audience laughed.
Sindermann got down off his podium
and walked to the front steps of the
stage, beyond the range of the vox-
mics. Though he dropped his voice
low, its trained pitch, that
practiced tool of all iterators,
carried his words with perfect
1,3,39
clarity, unenhanced, throughout the
chamber. ‘Religious faith. Belief
in daemons, belief in spirits, belief
in an afterlife and all the other
trappings of a preternatural
existence, simply existed to make us
all more comfortable and content in
the face of a measureless cosmos.
They were sops, bolsters for the
soul, crutches for the intellect,
prayers and lucky charms to help us
through the darkness. But we have
witnessed the cosmos now, my friends.
We have passed amongst it. We have
learned and understood the fabric of
reality. We have seen the stars from
behind, and found they have no
clockwork mechanisms, no golden
1,3,40
chariots carrying them abroad. We
have realised there is no need for
god, or any gods, and by extension no
use any longer for daemons or devils
or spirits. The greatest thing
mankind ever did was to reinvent
itself as a secular culture.’ His
audience applauded this
wholeheartedly. There were a few
cheers of approval. Iterators were
not simply schooled in the art of
public speaking. They were trained in
both sides of the business. Seeded
amongst a crowd, iterators could whip
it into enthusiasm with a few well-
timed responses, or equally turn a
rabble against the speaker. Iterators
often mingled with audiences to
1,3,41
bolster the effectiveness of the
colleague actually speaking.
Sindermann turned away, as if
finished, and then swung back again
as the clapping petered out, his
voice even softer and even more
penetrating. ‘But what of faith?
Faith has a quality, even when
religion has gone. We still need to
believe in something, don’t we?
Here it is. The true purpose of
mankind is to bear the torch of truth
aloft and shine it, even into the
darkest places. To share our
forensic, unforgiving, liberating
understanding with the dimmest
reaches of the cosmos. To emancipate
those shackled in ignorance. To free
1,3,42
ourselves and others from false gods,
and take our place at the apex of
sentient life. That… thatis what we
may pour faith into. Thatis what we
can harness our boundless faith
to.’ More cheers and clapping. He
wandered back to the podium. He
rested his hands on the wooden rails
of the lectern. ‘These last months,
we have quashed an entire culture.
Make no mistake… we haven’t
brought them to heel or rendered them
compliant. We have quashed them.
Broken their backs. Set them to
flame. I know this, because I know
the Warmaster unleashed his  Astartes
in this action. Don’t be coy about
what they do. They are killers, but
1,3,43
sanctioned. I see one now, one noble
warrior, seated at the back of the
hall.’ Faces turned back to crane
at Loken. There was a flutter of
applause. Sindermann started clapping
furiously. ‘Better than that. He
deserves better than that!’ A huge,
growing peal of clapping rose to the
roof of the hall. Loken stood, and
took it with an embarrassed bow. The
applause died away. ‘The souls we
have lately conquered believed in an
Imperium, a rule of man,’
Sindermann said as soon as the last
flutter had faded. ‘Nevertheless,
we killed their Emperor and forced
them into submission. We burned their
cities and scuppered their warships.
1,3,44
Is all we have to say in response to
their “why?” a feeble “I am
right, so you are wrong”?’ He
looked down, as if in thought. ‘Yet
we are. We areright. They are wrong.
This simple, clean faith we must
undertake to teach them. We are
right. They arewrong. Why? Not
because we say so. Because we knowso!
We will not say “I am right and you
are wrong” because we have bested
them in combat. We must proclaim it
because we know it is the responsible
truth. We cannot, should not, will
not promulgate that idea for any
other reason than we know, without
hesitation, without doubt, without
prejudice, that it is the truth, and
1,3,45
upon that truth we bestow our faith.
They are wrong . Their culture was
constructed upon lies. We have
brought them the keen edge of truth
and enlightened them. On that basis,
and that basis alone, go from here
and iterate our message.’ He had to
wait, smiling, until the uproar
subsided. ‘Your supper’s getting
cold. Dismissed.’ The student
iterators began to file slowly out of
the hall. Sindermann took another sip
of water from the glass set upon his
lectern and walked up the steps from
the stage to where Loken was seated.
‘Did you hear anything you
liked?’ he asked, sitting down
beside Loken and smoothing the skirts
1,3,46
of his robes. ‘You sound like a
showman,’ Loken said, ‘or a
carnival peddler, advertising his
wares.’ Sindermann crooked one
black, black eyebrow. ‘Sometimes,
Garviel, that’s precisely how I
feel.’ Loken frowned. ‘That you
don’t believe what you’re
selling?’ ‘Do you?’  ‘What am
I selling?’ ‘Faith, through
murder. Truth, through combat.’
‘It’s just combat. It has no
meaning other than combat. The
meaning has been decided long before
I’m instructed to deliver it.’
‘So as a warrior, you are without
conscience?’ Loken shook his head.
‘As a warrior, I am a man of
1,3,47
conscience, and that conscience is
directed by my faith in the Emperor.
My faith in our cause, as you were
just describing to the school, but as
a weapon, I am without conscience.
When activated for war, I set aside
my personal considerations, and
simply act. The value of my action
has already been weighed by the
greater conscience of our commander.
I kill until I am told to stop, and
in that period, I do not question the
killing. To do so would be nonsense,
and inappropriate. The commander has
already made a determination for war,
and all he expects of me is to
prosecute it to the best of my
abilities. A weapon doesn’t
1,3,48
question who it kills, or why. That
isn’t the point of weapons.’
Sindermann smiled. ‘No it’s not,
and that’s how it should be. I’m
curious, though. I didn’t think we
had a tutorial scheduled for
today.’ Beyond their duties as
iterators, senior counsellors like
Sindermann were expected to conduct
programmes of education for the
Astartes. This had been ordered by
the Warmaster himself. The men of the
Legion spent long periods in transit
between wars, and the Warmaster
insisted they use the time to develop
their minds and expand their
knowledge. ‘Even the mightiest
warriors should be schooled in areas
1,3,49
beyond warfare,’ he had ordained.
‘There will come a time when war is
over, and fighting done, and my
warriors should prepare themselves
for a life of peace. They must know
of other things besides martial
matters, or else find themselves
obsolete.’ ‘There’s no tutorial
scheduled,’ Loken said, ‘but I
wanted to talk with you,
informally.’ ‘Indeed? What’s on
your mind?’ ‘A troubling
thing…’ ‘You have been asked to
join the Mournival,’ Sindermann
said. Loken blinked. ‘How did you
know? Does everyone know?’
Sindermann grinned. ‘Sejanus is
gone, bless his bones. The Mournival
1,3,50
lacks. Are you surprised they came to
you?’ ‘I am.’  ‘I’m not.
You chase Abaddon and Sedirae with
your glories, Loken. The Warmaster
has his eye on you. So does Dorn.’
‘Primarch Dorn? Are you sure?’
‘I have been told he admires your
phlegmatic humour, Garviel. That’s
something, coming from a person like
him.’ ‘I’m flattered.’ ‘You
should be. Now what’s the
problem?’ ‘Am I fit? Should I
agree?’ Sindermann laughed. ‘Have
faith,’ he said. ‘There’s
something else,’ Loken said. ‘Go
on.’ ‘A remembrancer came to me
today. Annoyed me deeply, to be
truthful, but there was something she
1,3,51
said. She said, “could we not have
just left them alone?”’
‘Who?’ ‘These people. This
Emperor.’ ‘Garviel, you know the
answer to that.’ ‘When I was in
the tower, facing that man–’
Sindermann frowned. ‘The one who
pretended to be the “Emperor”?’
‘Yes. He said much the same thing.
Quartes, from his Quantifications ,
teaches us that the galaxy is a broad
space, and that much I have seen. If
we encounter a person, a society in
this cosmos that disagrees with us,
but is sound of itself, what right do
we have to destroy it? I mean…
could we not just leave them be and
ignore them? The galaxy is, after
1,3,52
all, such a broad space.’ ‘What
I’ve always liked about you,
Garviel,’ Sindermann said, ‘is
your humanity. This has clearly
played on your mind. Why haven’t
you spoken to me about it before?’
‘I thought it would fade,’ Loken
admitted. Sindermann rose to his
feet, and beckoned Loken to follow
him. They walked out of the audience
chamber and along one of the great
spinal hallways of the flagship, an
arch-roofed, buttressed canyon three
decks high, like the nave of an
ancient cathedral fane elongated to a
length of five kilometres. It was
gloomy, and the glorious banners of
Legions and companies and campaigns,
1,3,53
some faded, or damaged by old
battles, hung down from the roof at
intervals. Tides of personnel
streamed along the  hallway, their
voices lifting an odd susurration
into the vault, and Loken could see
other flows of foot traffic in the
illuminated galleries above, where
the upper decks overlooked the main
space. ‘The first thing,’
Sinderman said as they strolled
along, ‘is a simple bandage for
your worries. You heard me essay this
at length to the class and, in a way,
you ventured a version of it just a
moment ago when you spoke on the
subject of conscience. You are a
weapon, Garviel, an example of the
1,3,54
finest instrument of destruction
mankind has ever wrought. There must
be no place inside you for doubt or
question. You’re right. Weapons
should not think, they should only
allow themselves to be employed, for
the decision to use them is not
theirs to make. That decision must be
made – with great and terrible
care, and ethical consideration
beyond our capacity to judge – by
the primarchs and the commanders. The
Warmaster, like the beloved Emperor
before him, does not employ you
lightly. Only with a heavy heart and
a certain determination does he
unleash the Astartes. The Adeptus
Astartes is the last resort, and is
1,3,55
only ever used that way.’ Loken
nodded. ‘This is what you must
remember. Just because the Imperium
has the Astartes, and thus the
ability to defeat and, if necessary,
annihilate any foe, that’s not the
reason it happens. We have developed
the means to annihilate… We have
developed warriors like you,
Garviel… because it is
necessary.’ ‘A necessary evil?’
‘A necessary instrument. Right does
not follow might. Mankind has a
great, empirical truth to convey, a
message to bring, for the good of
all. Sometimes that message falls on
unwilling ears. Sometimes that
message is spurned and denied, as
1,3,56
here. Then, and only then, thank the
stars that we own the might to
enforce it. We are mighty because we
are right, Garviel. We are not right
because we are mighty. Vile the hour
when that reversal becomes our
credo.’ They had turned off the
spinal hallway and were walking along
a lateral promenade now, towards the
archive annex. Servitors waddled
past, their upper limbs laden with
books and data-slates. ‘Whether our
truth is right or not, must we always
enforce it upon the unwilling? As the
woman said, could we not just leave
them to their own destinies,
unmolested?’  ‘You are walking
along the shores of a lake,’
1,3,57
Sindermann said. ‘A boy is
drowning. Do you let him drown
because he was foolish enough to fall
into the water before he had learned
to swim? Or do you fish him out, and
teach him how to swim?’ Loken
shrugged. ‘The latter.’ ‘What
if he fights you off as you attempt
to save him, because he is afraid of
you? Because he doesn’t want to
learn how to swim?’ ‘I save him
anyway.’ They had stopped walking.
Sindermann pressed his hand to the
key plate set into the brass frame of
a huge door, and allowed his palm to
be read by the scrolling light. The
door opened, exhaling like a mouth,
gusting out climate-controlled air
1,3,58
and a background hint of dust. They
stepped into the vault of Archive
Chamber Three. Scholars, sphragists
and metaphrasts worked in silence at
the reading desks, summoning
servitors to select volumes from the
sealed stacks. ‘What interests me
about your concerns,’ Sindermann
said, keeping his voice precisely low
so that only Loken’s enhanced
hearing could follow it, ‘is what
they say about you. We have
established you are a weapon, and
that you don’t need to think about
what you do because the thinking is
done for you. Yet you allow the human
spark in you to worry, to fret and
empathise. You retain the ability to
1,3,59
consider the cosmos as a man would,
not as an instrument might.’ ‘I
see,’ Loken replied. ‘You’re
saying I have forgotten my place.
That I have overstepped the bounds of
my function.’ ‘Oh no,’
Sindermann smiled. ‘I’m saying
you have foundyour place.’ ‘How
so?’ Loken asked. Sindermann
gestured to the stacks of books that
rose, like towers, into the misty
altitudes of the archive. High above,
hovering servitors searched and
retrieved ancient texts sealed in
plastek carriers, swarming across the
clifffaces of the library like honey
bees. ‘Regard the books,’
Sindermann said. ‘Are there some I
1,3,60
should read? Will you prepare a list
for me?’ ‘Read them all. Read
them again. Swallow the learning and
ideas of our predecessors whole, for
it can only improve you as a man, but
if you do, you’ll find that none of
them holds an answer to still your
doubts.’ Loken laughed, puzzled.
Some of the metaphrasts nearby looked
up from  their study, annoyed at the
interruption. They quickly looked
down again when they saw the noise
had issued from an Astartes. ‘What
is the Mournival, Garviel?’
Sindermann whispered. ‘You know
very well…’ ‘Humour me. Is it
an official body? An organ of
governance, formally ratified, a
1,3,61
Legio rank?’ ‘Of course not. It
is an informal honour. It has no
official weight. Since the earliest
era of our Legion there has been a
Mournival. Four captains, those
regarded by their peers to be…’
He paused. ‘The best?’ Sindermann
asked. ‘My modesty is ashamed to
use that word. The most appropriate.
At any time, the Legion, in an
unofficial manner quite separate from
the chain of command, composes a
Mournival. A confraternity of four
captains, preferably ones of markedly
different aspects and humours, who
act as the soul of the Legion.’
‘And their job is to watch over the
moral health of the Legion, isn’t
1,3,62
that so? To guide and shape its
philosophy? And, most important of
all, to stand beside the commander
and be the voices he listens to
before any others. To be the comrades
and friends he can turn to privately,
and talk out his concerns and
troubles with freely, before they
ever become matters of state or
Council.’ ‘That is what the
Mournival is supposed to do,’ Loken
agreed. ‘Then it occurs to me,
Garviel, that only a weapon which
questions its use could be of any
value in that role. To be a member of
the Mournival, you need to have
concerns. You need to have wit, and
most certainly you need to have
1,3,63
doubts. Do you know what a naysmith
is?’ ‘No.’ ‘In early Terran
history, during the dominance of the
Sumaturan dynasts, naysmiths were
employed by the ruling classes. Their
job was to disagree. To question
everything. To consider any argument
or policy and find fault with it, or
articulate the counter position. They
were highly valued.’ ‘You want me
to become a naysmith?’ Loken asked.
Sindermann shook his head. ‘I want
you to be you, Garviel. The Mournival
needs your common sense and clarity.
Sejanus was always the voice of
reason, the measured balance between
Abaddon’s choler and Aximand’s
melancholic disdain. The balance is
1,3,64
gone, and the Warmaster needs that
balance now more than ever. You came
to me this morning because you wanted
my blessing. You wanted to know if
you should accept the honour. By your
own admission, Garviel, by the merit
of your own doubts, you have answered
your own question.’  
1,3,65
FOUR
 Summoned
Ezekyle by name A winning hand She
had asked what the planet was called,
and the crew of the shuttle had
answered her ‘Terra’, which was
hardly useful. Mersadie Olitan had
spent the first twenty-eight years of
her twenty-nine-year life on Terra,
and this wasn’t it. The iterator
sent to accompany her was of little
better use. A modest, oliveskinned
man in his late teens, the
iterator’s name was Memed, and he
was possessed of a fearsome intellect
and precocious genius. But the
violent suborbital passage of the
shuttle disagreed with his
1,4,1
constitution, and he spent most of
the trip unable to answer her
questions because he was too occupied
retching into a plastek bag. The
shuttle set down on a stretch of
formal lawn between rows of spayed
and pollarded trees, eight kilometres
west of the High City. It was early
evening, and stars already glimmered
in the violet smudge at the sky’s
edges. At high altitude, ships passed
over, their lights blinking. Mersadie
stepped down the shuttle’s ramp
onto the grass, breathing in the odd
scents and slightly variant
atmosphere of the world. She stopped
short. The air, oxygen rich, she
imagined, was making her giddy, and
1,4,2
that giddiness was further agitated
by the thought of where she was. For
the first time in her life she was
standing on another soil, another
world. It seemed to her quite
momentous, as if a ceremonial band
ought to be playing. She was, as far
as she knew, one of the very first of
the remembrancers to be granted
access to the surface of the
conquered world.  She turned to look
at the distant city, taking in the
panorama and committing it to her
memory coils. She blink-clicked her
eyes to store certain views
digitally, noting that smoke still
rose from the cityscape, though the
fight had been over months ago. ‘We
1,4,3
are calling it Sixty-Three
Nineteen,’ the iterator said,
coming down the ramp behind her.
Apparently, his queasy constitution
had been stabilised by planetfall.
She recoiled delicately from the
stink of sick on his breath.
‘Sixty-Three Nineteen?’ she
asked. ‘It being the ninteenth
world the 63rd Expedition has brought
to compliance,’ Memed said,
‘though, of course, full compliance
is not yet established here. The
charter is yet to be ratified. Lord
Governor Elect Rakris is having
trouble forming a consenting
coalition parliament, but Sixty-Three
Nineteen will do. The locals call
1,4,4
this world Terra, and we can’t be
having two of those, can we? As far
as I see it, that was the root of the
problem in the first place…’ ‘I
see,’ said Mersadie, moving away.
She touched her hand against the bark
of one of the pollarded trees. It
felt… real. She smiled to herself
and blinkclicked it. Already, the
basis of her account, with visual
keys, was formulating in her enhanced
mind. A personal angle, that’s what
she’d take. She’d use the novelty
and unfamiliarity of her first
planetfall as a theme around which
her remembrance would hang. ‘It’s
a beautiful evening,’ the iterator
announced, coming to stand beside
1,4,5
her. He’d left his sloshing bags of
vomit at the foot of the ramp, as if
he expected someone to dispose of
them for him. The four army troopers
delegated to her protection certainly
weren’t about to do it. Perspiring
in their heavy velvet overcoats and
shakos, their rifles slung over their
shoulders, they closed up around her.
‘Mistress Oliton?’ the officer
said. ‘He’s waiting.’ Mersadie
nodded and followed them. Her heart
was beating hard. This was going to
be quite an occasion. A week before,
her friend and fellow remembrancer
Euphrati Keeler, who had emphatically
achieved more than any of the
remembrancers so far, had been on
1,4,6
hand in the eastern city of Kaentz,
observing crusader operations, when
Maloghurst had been found alive. The
Warmaster’s equerry, believed lost
when the ships of his embassy had
been burned out of orbit, had
survived, escaping via drop pod.
Badly injured,  he had been nursed
and protected by the family of a
farmer in the territories outside
Kaentz. Keeler had been right there,
by chance, to pict record the
equerry’s recovery from the
farmstead. It had been a coup. Her
picts, so beautifully composed, had
been flashed around the expedition
fleet, and savoured by the Imperial
retinues. Suddenly, Euphrati Keeler
1,4,7
was being talked about. Suddenly,
remembrancers weren’t such a bad
thing after all. With a few,
brilliant clicks of her picter,
Euphrati had advanced the cause of
the remembrancers enormously. Now
Mersadie hoped she could do the same.
She had been summoned. She still
couldn’t quite get over that. She
had been summoned to the surface.
That fact alone would have been
enough, but it was whohad summoned
her that really mattered. He had
personally authorised her transit
permit, and seen to the appointment
of a bodyguard and one of
Sindermann’s best iterators. She
couldn’t understand why. Last time
1,4,8
they’d met, he’d been so brutal
that she’d considered resigning and
taking the first conveyance home. He
was standing on a gravel pathway
between the tree rows, waiting for
her. As she came up, the soldiers
around her, she registered simple awe
at the sight of him in his full
plate. Gleaming white, with a trace
of black around the edges. His helm,
with its lateral horse-brush crest,
was off, hung at his waist. He was a
giant, two and a half metres tall.
She sensed the soldiers around her
hesitating. ‘Wait here,’ she told
them, and they dropped back,
relieved. A soldier of the Imperial
army could be as tough as old boots,
1,4,9
but he didn’t want to tangle with
an Astartes. Especially not one of
the Luna Wolves, the mightiest of the
mighty, the deadliest of all Legions.
‘You too,’ she said to the
iterator. ‘Oh, right,’ Memed
said, coming to a halt. ‘The
summons was personal.’ ‘I
understand,’ he said. Mersadie
walked up to the Luna Wolves captain.
He towered over her, so much she had
to shield her eyes with her hand
against the setting sun to look up at
him. ‘Remembrancer,’ he said, his
voice as deep as an oak-root.
‘Captain. Before we start, I’d
like to apologise for any offence I
may have caused the last time
1,4,10
we–’ ‘If I’d taken offence,
mistress, would I have summoned you
here?’  ‘I suppose not.’ ‘You
suppose right. You raised my hackles
with your questions last time, but I
admit I was too hard on you.’ ‘I
spoke with unnecessary temerity–’
‘It was that temerity that caused
me to think of you,’ Loken replied.
‘I can’t explain further. I
won’t, but you should know that it
was your very speaking out of turn
that brought me here. Which is why I
decided to have you brought here too.
If that’s what remembrancers do,
you’ve done your job well.’
Mersadie wasn’t sure what to say.
She lowered her hand. The last rays
1,4,11
of sunlight were in her eyes. ‘Do
you… do you want me to witness
something? To remember something?’
‘No,’ he replied curtly. ‘What
happens now happens privately, but I
wanted you to know that, in part, it
is because of you. When I return, if
I feel it is appropriate, I will
convey certain recollections to you.
If that is acceptable.’ ‘I’m
honoured, captain. I will await your
pleasure.’ Loken nodded. ‘Should
I come with–’ Memed began.
‘No,’ said the Luna Wolf.
‘Right,’ Memed said quickly,
backing off. He went away to study a
tree bole. ‘You asked me the right
questions, and so showed me I was
1,4,12
asking the right questions too,’
Loken told Mersadie. ‘Did I? Did
you answer them?’ ‘No,’ he
replied. ‘Wait here, please,’ he
said, and walked away towards a box
hedge trimmed by the finest
topiarists into a thick, green
bastion wall. He vanished from sight
under a leafy arch. Mersadie turned
to the waiting soldiers. ‘Know any
games?’ she asked. They shrugged.
She plucked a deck of cards from her
coat pocket. ‘I’ve got one to
show you,’ she grinned, and sat
down on the grass to deal. The
soldiers put down their rifles and
grouped around her in the lengthening
blue shadows. ‘Soldiers love
1,4,13
cards,’ Ignace Karkasy had said to
her before she left the flagship,
right before he’d grinned and
handed her the deck.  Beyond the high
hedge, an ornamental water garden lay
in shadowy ruin. The height of the
hedge and the neighbouring trees,
just now becoming spiky black shapes
against the rose sky, screened out
what was left of the direct sunlight.
The gloom upon the gardens was almost
misty. The garden had once been
composed of rectangular ouslite slabs
laid like giant flagstones,
surrounding a series of square,
shallow basins where lilies and
bright water flowers had flourished
in pebbly sinks fed by some spring or
1,4,14
water source. Frail ghost ferns and
weeping trees had edged the pools.
During the assault of the High City,
shells or airborne munitions had
bracketed the area, felling many of
the plants and shattering a great
number of the blocks. Many of the
ouslite slabs had been dislodged, and
several of the pools greatly
increased in breadth and depth by the
addition of deep, gouging craters.
But the hidden spring had continued
to feed the place, filling the shell
holes, and pouring overflow between
dislodged stones. The whole garden
was a shimmering, flat pool in the
gloom, out of which tangled branches,
broken root balls and asymmetric
1,4,15
shards of rock stuck up in miniature
archipelagos. Some of the intact
blocks, slabs two metres long and
half a metre thick, had been
rearranged, and not randomly by the
blasts. They had been levered out to
form a walkway into the pool area, a
stone jetty sunk almost flush with
the water’s surface. Loken stepped
out onto the causeway and began to
follow it. The air smelled damp, and
he could hear the clack of amphibians
and the hiss of evening flies. Water
flowers, their fragile colours almost
lost in the closing darkness, drifted
on the still water either side of his
path. Loken felt no fear. He was not
built to feel it, but he registered a
1,4,16
trepidation, an anticipation that
made his hearts beat. He was, he
knew, about to pass a threshold in
his life, and he held faith that what
lay beyond that threshold would be
provident. It also felt right that he
was about to take a profound step
forward in his career. His world, his
life, had changed greatly of late,
with the rise of the Warmaster and
the consequent alteration of the
crusade, and it was only proper that
he changed with it. A new phase. A
new time. He paused and looked up at
the stars that were beginning to
light in the purpling sky. A new
time, and a gloriousnew time at that.
Like him,  mankind was on a
1,4,17
threshold, about to step forward into
greatness. He had gone deep into the
ragged sprawl of the water garden,
far beyond the lamps of the landing
zone behind the hedge, far beyond the
lights of the city. The sun had
vanished. Blue shadows surrounded
him. The causeway path came to an
end. Water gleamed beyond. Ahead,
across thirty metres of still pond, a
little bank of weeping trees rose up
like an atoll, silhouetted against
the sky. He wondered if he should
wait. Then he saw a flicker of light
amongst the trees across the water, a
flutter of yellow flame that went as
quickly as it came. Loken stepped off
the causeway into the water. It was
1,4,18
shin deep. Ripples, hard black
circles, radiated out across the
reflective pool. He began to wade out
towards the islet, hoping that his
feet wouldn’t suddenly encounter
some unexpected depth of submerged
crater and so lend comedy to this
solemn moment. He reached the bank of
trees and stood in the shallows,
gazing up into the tangled blackness.
‘Give us your name,’ a voice
called out of the darkness. It spoke
the words in Cthonic, his home-
tongue, the battle-argot of the Luna
Wolves. ‘Garviel Loken is my name
to give.’ ‘And what is your
honour?’ ‘I am Captain of the
Tenth Company of the Sixteenth Legio
1,4,19
Astartes.’ ‘And who is your sworn
master?’ ‘The Warmaster and the
Emperor both.’ Silence followed,
interrupted only by the splash of
frogs and the noise of insects in the
waterlogged thickets. The voice spoke
again. Two words. ‘Illuminate
him.’ There was a brief metallic
scrape as the slot of a lantern was
pulled open, and yellow flame-light
shone out across him. Three figures
stood on the treelined bank above
him, one holding the lantern up.
Aximand. Torgaddon, lifting the
lantern. Abaddon. Like him, they wore
their warrior armour, the dancing
light catching bright off the curves
of the plate. All were bareheaded,
1,4,20
their crested helmets hung at their
waists. ‘Do you vouch that this
soul is all he claims to be?’
Abaddon asked. It seemed a strange
question, as all three of them knew
him well enough. Loken  understood it
was part of the ceremony. ‘I so
vouch,’ Torgaddon said. ‘Increase
the light.’ Abaddon and Aximand
stepped away, and began to open the
slots of a dozen other lanterns
hanging from the surrounding boughs.
When they had finished, a golden
light suffused them all. Torgaddon
set his own lamp on the ground. The
trio stepped forward into the water
to face Loken. Tarik Torgaddon was
the tallest of them, his trickster
1,4,21
grin never leaving his face.
‘Loosen up, Garvi,’ he chuckled.
‘We don’t bite.’ Loken flashed
a smile back, but he felt unnerved.
Partly, it was the high status of
these three men, but he also hadn’t
expected the induction to be so
ritualistic. Horus Aximand, Captain
of Fifth Company, was the youngest
and shortest of them, shorter than
Loken. He was squat and robust, like
a guard dog. His head was shaved
smooth, and oiled, so that the lamp-
light gleamed off it. Aximand, like
many in the younger generations of
the Legion, had been named in honour
of the commander, but only he used
the name openly. His noble face, with
1,4,22
wide-set eyes and firm, straight
nose, uncannily resembled the visage
of the Warmaster, and this had earned
him the affectionate name ‘Little
Horus’. Little Horus Aximand, the
devil-dog in war, the master
strategist. He nodded greeting to
Loken. Ezekyle Abaddon, First Captain
of the Legion, was a towering brute.
Somewhere between Loken’s height
and Torgaddon’s, he seemed greater
than both due to the cresting top-
knot adorning his otherwise shaved
scalp. When his helm was off, Abaddon
bound his mane of black hair up in a
silver sleeve that made it stand
proud like a palm tree or a fetish
switch on his crown. He, like
1,4,23
Torgaddon, had been in the Mournival
from its inception. He, like
Torgaddon and Aximand both, shared
the same aspect of straight nose and
wide-spaced eyes so reminiscent of
the Warmaster, though only in Aximand
were the features an actual likeness.
They might have been brothers, actual
womb brothers, if they had been sired
in the old way. As it was, they were
brothers in terms of gene-source and
martial fraternity. Now Loken was to
be their brother too. There was a
curious incidence in the Luna Wolves
Legion of Astartes bearing a facial
resemblance to their primarch. This
had been put down to conformities in
the gene-seed, but still, those who
1,4,24
echoed Horus in their  features were
considered especially lucky, and were
known by all the men as ‘the Sons
of Horus’. It was a mark of honour,
and it often seemed the case that
‘Sons’ rose faster and found
better favour than the rest.
Certainly, Loken knew for a fact, all
the previous members of the Mournival
had been ‘Sons of Horus’. In this
respect, he was unique. Loken owed
his looks to an inheritance of the
pale, craggy bloodline of Cthonia. He
was the first non-‘Son’ to be
elected to this elite inner circle.
Though he knew it couldn’t be the
case, he felt as if he had achieved
this eminence through simple merit,
1,4,25
rather than the atavistic whim of
physiognomy. ‘This is a simple
act,’ Abaddon said, regarding
Loken. ‘You have been vouched for
here, and proposed by great men
before that. Our lord, and the Lord
Dorn have both put your name
forward.’ ‘As have you, sir, so I
understand,’ Loken said. Abaddon
smiled. ‘Few match you in
soldiering, Garviel. I’ve had my
eye on you, and you proved my
interest when you took the palace
ahead of me.’ ‘Luck.’
‘There’s no such thing,’ said
Aximand gruffly. ‘He only says that
because he never has any,’
Torgaddon grinned. ‘I only say that
1,4,26
because there’s no such thing,’
Aximand objected. ‘Science has
shown us this. There is no luck.
There is only success or the lack of
it.’ ‘Luck,’ said Abaddon.
‘Isn’t that just a word for
modesty? Garviel is too modest to say
“Yes, Ezekyle, I bested you, I won
the palace, and triumphed where you
did not,” for he feels that would
not become him. And I admire modesty
in a man, but the truth is, Garviel,
you are here because you are a
warrior of superlative talent. We
welcome you.’ ‘Thank you, sir,’
Loken said. ‘A first lesson,
then,’ Abaddon said. ‘In the
Mournival, we are equals. There is no
1,4,27
rank. Before the men, you may refer
to me as “sir” or “First
Captain”, but between us, there is
no ceremony. I am Ezekyle.’
‘Horus,’ said Aximand.
‘Tarik,’ said Torgaddon. ‘I
understand,’ Loken answered,
‘Ezekyle.’ ‘The rules of our
confraternity are simple,’ Aximand
said, ‘and we will get to them, but
there is no structure to the duties
expected of you. You should prepare
yourself to spend more time with the
command staff, and function at  the
Warmaster’s side. Have you a proxy
in mind to oversee the Tenth in your
absence?’ ‘Yes, Horus,’ Loken
said. ‘Vipus?’ Torgaddon smiled.
1,4,28
‘I would,’ Loken said, ‘but the
honour should be Jubal’s. Seniority
and rank.’ Aximand shook his head.
‘Second lesson. Go with your heart.
If you trust Vipus, make it Vipus.
Never compromise. Jubal’s a big
boy. He’ll get over it.’ ‘There
will be other duties and obligations,
special duties…’ Abaddon said.
‘Escorts, ceremonies, embassies,
planning meetings. Are you sanguine
about that? Your life will change.’
‘I am sanguine,’ Loken nodded.
‘Then we should mark you in,’
Abaddon said. He stepped past Loken
and waded forward into the shallow
lake, away from the light of the
lamps. Aximand followed him.
1,4,29
Torgaddon touched Loken on the arm
and ushered him along as well. They
strode out into the black water and
formed a ring. Abaddon bade them
stand stock-still until the water
ceased to lap and ripple. It became
mirror-smooth. The bright reflection
of the rising moon wavered on the
water between them. ‘The one
fixture that has always witnessed an
induction,’ Abaddon said. ‘The
moon. Symbolic of our Legion name. No
one has ever entered the Mournival,
except by the light of a moon.’
Loken nodded. ‘This seems a poor,
false one,’ Aximand muttered,
looking up at the sky, ‘but it will
do. The image of the moon must also
1,4,30
always be reflected. In the first
days of the Mournival, close on two
hundred years ago, it was favoured to
have the chosen moon’s image
captured in a scrying dish or
polished mirror. We make do now.
Water suffices.’ Loken nodded
again. His feeling of being unnerved
had returned, sharp and unwelcome.
This was a ritual, and it smacked
dangerously of the practices of
corpse-whisperers and spiritualists.
The entire process seemed shot
through with superstition and arcane
worship, the sort of spiritual
unreason Sindermann had taught him to
rail against. He felt he had to say
something before it was too late.
1,4,31
‘I am a man of faith,’  he said
softly, ‘and that faith is the
truth of the Imperium. I will not bow
to any fane or acknowledge any
spirit. I own only the empirical
clarity of Imperial Truth.’ The
other three looked at him. ‘I told
you he was straight up and down,’
Torgaddon said. Abaddon and Aximand
laughed. ‘There are no spirits
here, Garviel,’ Abaddon said,
resting a hand reassuringly against
Loken’s arm. ‘We’re not trying
to ensorcel you,’ Aximand chuckled.
‘This is just an old habit, a
practice. The way it has always been
done,’ Torgaddon said. ‘We keep
it up for no other reason than it
1,4,32
seems to make it matter. It’s…
pantomime, I suppose.’ ‘Yes,
pantomime,’ agreed Abaddon. ‘We
want this moment to be special to
you, Garviel,’ Aximand said. ‘We
want you to remember it. We believe
it’s important to mark an induction
with a sense of ceremony and
occasion, so we use the old ways.
Perhaps that’s just theatrical of
us, but we find it reassuring.’
‘I understand,’ Loken said. ‘Do
you?’ Abaddon asked. ‘You’re
going to make a pledge to us. An oath
as firm as any oath of moment you
have ever undertaken. Man to man.
Cold and clear and very, very
secular. An oath of brothership, not
1,4,33
some occult pact. We stand together
in the light of a moon, and swear a
bond that only death will break.’
‘I understand,’ Loken repeated.
He felt foolish. ‘I want to take
the oath.’ Abaddon nodded.
‘Let’s mark you, then. Say the
names of the others.’ Torgaddon
bowed his head and recited nine
names. Since the foundation of the
Mournival, only twelve men had held
the un-official rank, and three of
those were present. Loken would be
the thirteenth. ‘Keyshen. Minos.
Berabaddon. Litus. Syrakul.
Deradaeddon. Karaddon. Janipur.
Sejanus.’ ‘Lost in glory,’
Aximand and Abaddon said as one
1,4,34
voice. ‘Mourned by the Mournival.
Only in death does duty end.’ Loken
thought about Abaddon’s words. A
bond that only death will. break
Death was the single expectation of
each and every Astartes. Violent
death. It was not an if, it was a
when. In the service of the Imperium,
each of them would eventually
sacrifice his life. They were
phlegmatic about it. It would
happen, it was that simple. One day,
tomorrow, next year. It would happen.
There was an irony, of course. To all
intents and purposes, and by every
measurement known to the gene-
scientists and gerontologists, the
Astartes, like the primarchs, were
1,4,35
immortals. Age would not wither them,
nor bring them down. They would live
forever… five thousand years, ten
thousand, beyond even that into some
unimaginable millennium. Except for
the scythe of war. Immortal, but not
invulnerable. Yes, they might live
forever, but they would never get the
chance. Immortality was a by-product
of their Astartes strengths, but
those strengths had been gene-built
for combat. They had been born
immortal only to die in war. That was
the way of it. Brief, bright lives.
Like Hastur Sejanus, the warrior
Loken was replacing. Only the beloved
Emperor, who had left the warring
behind, would truly live forever.
1,4,36
Loken tried to imagine the future,
but the image would not form. Death
would wipe them all from history. Not
even the great First Captain Ezekyle
Abaddon would survive forever. There
would be a time when Abaddon no
longer waged bloody war across the
territories of humanity. Loken
sighed. That would be a sad day
indeed. Men would cry out for
Abaddon’s return, but he would
never come. He tried to picture the
manner of his own death. Fabled,
imaginary combats flashed through his
mind. He imagined himself at the
Emperor’s side, fighting some
great, last stand against an unknown
foe. Primarch Horus would be there,
1,4,37
of course. He had to be. It
wouldn’t be the same without him.
Loken would battle, and die, and
perhaps even Horus would die, to save
the Emperor at the last. Glory.
Glory, like he’d never known. Such
an hour would become so ingrained in
the minds of men that it would be the
cornerstone of all that came after. A
great battle, upon which human
culture would be based. Then,
briefly, he imagined another death.
Alone, far away from his comrades and
his Legion, dying from cruel wounds
on some nameless rock, his passing as
memorable as smoke. Loken swallowed
hard. Either way, his service was to
the Emperor, and his service would be
1,4,38
true to the end. ‘The names are
said,’ Abaddon intoned, ‘and of
them, we hail Sejanus, latest to
fall.’ ‘Hail, Sejanus!’
Torgaddon and Aximand cried.
‘Garviel Loken,’ Abaddon said,
looking at Loken. ‘We ask you to
take Sejanus’s place. How say
you?’ ‘I will do this thing
gladly.’ ‘Will you swear an oath
to uphold the confraternity of the
Mournival?’ ‘I will,’ said
Loken. ‘Will you accept our
brothership and give it back as a
brother?’ ‘I will.’ ‘Will you
be true to the Mournival to the end
of your life?’ ‘I will.’
‘Will you serve the Luna Wolves for
1,4,39
as long as they bear that proud
name?’ ‘I will,’ said Loken.
‘Do you pledge to the commander,
who is primarch over us all?’ asked
Aximand. ‘I so pledge.’ ‘And to
the Emperor above all primarchs,
everlasting?’ ‘I so pledge.’
‘Do you swear to uphold the truth
of the Imperium of Mankind, no matter
what evil may assail it?’ Torgaddon
asked. ‘I swear,’ said Loken.
‘Do you swear to stand firm against
all enemies, alien and domestic?’
‘This I swear.’ ‘And in war,
kill for the living and kill for the
dead?’ ‘Kill for the living! Kill
for the dead!’ Abaddon and Aximand
echoed. ‘I swear.’ ‘As the moon
1,4,40
lights us,’ Abaddon said, ‘will
you be a true brother to your brother
Astartes?’ ‘I will.’ ‘No
matter the cost?’ ‘No matter the
cost.’ ‘Your oath is taken,
Garviel. Welcome into the Mournival.
Tarik? Illuminate us.’ Torgaddon
pulled a vapour flare from his belt
and fired it off into the night sky.
It burst in a bright umbrella of
light, white and harsh. As the sparks
of it rained slowly down onto the
waters, the four warriors hugged and
whooped, clasping hands and slapping
backs. Torgaddon,  Aximand and
Abaddon took turns to embrace Loken.
‘You’re one of us now,’
Torgaddon whispered as he drew Loken
1,4,41
close. ‘I am,’ said Loken. Later,
on the islet, by the light of the
lanterns, they branded Loken’s helm
above the right eye with the crescent
mark of the new moon. This was his
badge of office. Aximand’s helm
bore the brand of the half moon,
Torgaddon’s the gibbous, and
Abaddon’s the full. The four stage
cycle of a moon was shared between
their wargear. So the Mournival was
denoted. They sat on the islet,
talking and joking, until the sun
rose again. They were playing cards
on the lawn by the light of chemical
lanterns. The simple game Mersadie
had proposed had long been eclipsed
by a punitive betting game suggested
1,4,42
by one of the soldiers. Then the
iterator, Memed, had joined them, and
taken great pains to teach them an
old version of cups. Memed shuffled
and dealt the cards with marvellous
dexterity. One of the soldiers
whistled mockingly. ‘A real card
hand we have here,’ the officer
remarked. ‘This is an old game,’
Memed said, ‘which I’m sure you
will enjoy. It dates back a long way,
its origins lost in the very
beginnings of Old Night. I have
researched it, and I understand it
was popular amongst the peoples of
Ancient Merica, and also the tribes
of the Franc.’ He let them play a
few dummy hands until they had the
1,4,43
way of it, but Mersadie found it hard
to remember what spread won over
what. In the seventh turn, believing
she had the game’s measure at last,
she discarded a hand which she
believed inferior to the cards Memed
was holding. ‘No, no,’ he smiled.
‘You win.’ ‘But you have four
of a kind again.’ He laid out her
cards. ‘Even so, you see?’ She
shook her head. ‘It’s all too
confusing.’ ‘The suits
correspond,’ he said, as if
beginning a lecture, ‘to the layers
of society back then. Swords stand
for the warrior aristocracy; cups, or
chalices, for the ancient priesthood;
diamonds, or coins, for the merchant
1,4,44
classes; and baton clubs for the
worker caste…’ Some of the
soldiers grumbled.  ‘Stop iterating
to us,’ Mersadie said. ‘Sorry,’
Memed grinned. ‘Anyway, you win. I
have four alike, but you have ace,
monarch, empress and knave. A
mournival.’ ‘What did you just
say?’ Mersadie Oliton asked,
sitting up. ‘Mournival,’ Memed
replied, reshuffling the old, square-
cut cards. ‘It’s the old Franc
word for the four royal cards. A
winning hand.’ Behind them, away
beyond a high wall of hedge invisible
in the still night, a flare suddenly
banged off and lit the sky white.
‘A winning hand,’ Mersadie
1,4,45
murmured. Coincidence, and something
she privately believed in, called
fate, had just opened the future up
to her. It looked very inviting
indeed.  
1,4,46
FIVE
 Peeter Egon Momus
Lectitio Divinitatus Malcontent
Peeter Egon Momus was doing them a
great honour. Peeter Egon Momus was
deigning to share with them his
visions for the new High City. Peeter
Egon Momus, architect designate for
the 63rd Expedition, was unveiling
his preparatory ideas for the
transformation of the conquered city
into a permanent memorial to glory
and compliance. The trouble was,
Peeter Egon Momus was just a figure
in the distance and largely
inaudible. In the gathered audience,
in the dusty heat, Ignace Karkasy
shifted impatiently and craned his
1,5,1
neck to see. The assembly had been
gathered in a city square north of
the palace. It was just after midday,
and the sun was at its zenith,
scorching the bare basalt towers and
yards of the city. Though the high
walls around the square offered some
shade, the air was oven dry and
stiflingly hot. There was a breeze,
but even that was heated like exhaust
vapour, and it did nothing but stir
up fine grit in the air. Powder dust,
the particulate residue of the great
battle, was everywhere, hazing the
bright air like smoke. Karkasy’s
throat was as arid as a river bed in
drought. Around him, people in the
crowd coughed and sneezed. The crowd,
1,5,2
five hundred strong, had been
carefully vetted. Three-quarters of
them were local dignitaries;
grandees, nobles, merchants, members
of the overthrown government,
representatives of that part of
Sixty-Three Nineteen’s ruling
classes who had pledged compliance to
the new order. They had been summoned
by invitation so that they might
participate,  however superficially,
in the renewal of their society. The
rest were remembrancers. Many of
them, like Karkasy, had been granted
their first transit permit to the
surface, at long last, so they could
attend. If this was what he had been
waiting for, Karkasy thought, they
1,5,3
could keep it. Standing in a crowded
kiln while some old fart made
incoherent noises in the background.
The crowd seemed to share his mood.
They were hot and despondent. Karkasy
saw no smiles on the faces of the
invited locals, just hard, drawn
looks of forbearance. The choice
between compliance or death didn’t
make compliance any more pleasurable.
They were defeated, deprived of their
culture and their way of life, facing
a future determined by alien minds.
They were simply, wearily enduring
the indignity of this period of
transition into the Imperium of Man.
From time to time, they clapped in a
desultory manner, but only when
1,5,4
stirred up by the iterators carefully
planted in their midst. The crowd had
drawn up around the aprons of a metal
stage erected for the event. Upon it
were arranged hololithic screens and
relief models of the city to be, as
well as many of the extravagantly
complex brass and steel surveying
instruments Momus utilised in his
work. Geared, spoked and meticulous,
the instruments suggested to
Karkasy’s mind devices of torture.
Torture was right. Momus, when he
could be seen between the heads of
the crowd, was a small, trim man with
over-dainty mannerisms. As he
explained his plans, the staff of
iterators on stage with him aimed
1,5,5
live picters close up at relevant
areas of the relief models, the
images transferring directly to the
screens, along with graphic
schematics. But the sunlight was too
glaring for decent hololithic
projection, and the images were
milked-out and hard to comprehend.
Something was wrong with the vox-mic
Momus was using too, and what little
of his speech came through served
only to demonstrate the man had no
gift whatsoever for public speaking.
‘…always a heliolithic city, a
tribute to the sun above, and we may
see this afternoon, indeed, I’m
sure you will have noticed, the glory
of the light here. A city of light.
1,5,6
Light out of darkness is a noble
theme, by which, of course, I mean
the light of truth shining upon the
darkness of ignorance. I am much
taken with the local phototropic
technologies I have found here, and
intend to incorporate them into the
design…’ Karkasy sighed. He never
thought he would find himself wishing
for an  iterator, but at least those
bastards knew how to speak in public.
Peeter Egon Momus should have left
the talking to one of the iterators
while he aimed the wretched picter
wand for them. His mind wandered. He
looked up at the high walls around
them, geometric slabs against the
blue sky, baked pink in the sunlight,
1,5,7
or smoke black where shadows slanted.
He saw the scorch marks and dotted
bolt craters that pitted the basalt
like acne. Beyond the walls, the
towers of the palace were in worse
repair, their plasterwork hanging off
like shed snakeskin, their missing
windows like blinded eyes. In a yard
to the south of the gathering, a
Titan of the Mechanicum stood on
station, its grim humanoid form
rising up over the walls. It stood
perfectly still, like a piece of
monumental martial statuary,
instantly installed. Now that,
thought Karkasy, was a far more
appropriate celebration of glory and
compliance. Karkasy stared at the
1,5,8
Titan for a little while. He’d
never seen anything like it before in
his life, except in picts. The
awesome sight of it almost made the
tedious outing worthwhile. The more
he stared at it, the more
uncomfortable it made him feel. It
was so huge, so threatening, and so
very still. He knew it could move. He
began to wish it would. He found
himself yearning for it to suddenly
turn its head or take a step, or
otherwise rumble into animation. Its
immobility was agonising. Then he
began to fear that if it did suddenly
move, he would be quite unmanned, and
might be forced to cry out in
involuntary terror, and fall to his
1,5,9
knees. A burst of clapping made him
jump. Momus had apparently said
something apposite, and the iterators
were stirring up the crowd in
response. Karkasy slapped his sweaty
hands together a few times
obediently. Karkasy was sick of it.
He knew he couldn’t bear to stand
there much longer with the Titan
staring at him. He took one last look
at the stage. Momus was rambling on,
well into his fiftieth minute. The
only other point of interest to the
whole affair, as far as Karkasy was
concerned, stood at the back of the
podium behind Momus. Two giants in
yellow plate. Two noble Astartes from
the VII Legion, the Imperial Fists,
1,5,10
the Emperor’s Praetorians. They
were presumably in attendance to lend
Momus an appropriate air of
authority. Karkasy guessed  the VII
had been chosen over the Luna Wolves
because of their noted genius in the
arts of fortification and defence.
The Imperial Fists were fortress
builders, warrior masons who raised
such impenetrable redoubts that they
could be held for eternity against
any enemy. Karkasy smelled the artful
handiwork of iterator propaganda: the
architects of war watching over the
architect of peace. Karkasy had
waited to see if either would speak,
or come forward to remark upon
Momus’s plans, but they did not.
1,5,11
They stood there, bolters across
their broad chests, as static and
unwavering as the Titan. Karkasy
turned away, and began to push his
way out through the inflexible crowd.
He headed towards the rear of the
square. Troopers of the Imperial army
had been stationed around the hem of
the crowd as a precaution. They had
been required to wear full dress
uniform, and they were so overheated
that their sweaty cheeks were
blanched a sickly green-white. One of
them noticed Karkasy moving out
through the thinnest part of the
audience, and came over to him.
‘Where are you going, sir?’ he
asked. ‘I’m dying of thirst,’
1,5,12
Karkasy replied. ‘There will be
refreshments, I’m told, after the
presentation,’ the soldier said.
His voice caught on the word
‘refreshments’ and Karkasy knew
there would be none for the common
soldiery. ‘Well, I’ve had
enough,’ Karkasy said. ‘It’s
not over.’ ‘I’ve had enough.’
The soldier frowned. Perspiration
beaded at the bridge of his nose,
just beneath the rim of his heavy fur
shako. His throat and jowls were
flushed pink and sheened with sweat.
‘I can’t allow you to wander
away. Movement is supposed to be
restricted to approved areas.’
Karkasy grinned wickedly. ‘And I
1,5,13
thought you were here to keep trouble
out, not keep us in.’ The soldier
didn’t find that funny, or even
ironic. ‘We’re here to keep you
safe, sir,’ he said. ‘I’d like
to see your permit.’ Karkasy took
out his papers. They were an untidy,
crumpled bundle, warm and damp from
his trouser pocket. Karkasy waited,
faintly embarrassed,  while the
soldier studied them. He had never
liked barking up against authority,
especially not in front of people,
though the back of the crowd didn’t
seem to be at all interested in the
exchange. ‘You’re a
remembrancer?’ the soldier asked.
‘Yes. Poet,’ Karkasy added before
1,5,14
the inevitable second question got
asked. The soldier looked up from the
papers into Karkasy’s face, as if
searching for some essential
characteristic of poet-hood that
might be discerned there, comparable
to a Navigator’s third eye or a
slave-drone’s serial tattoo. He’d
likely never seen a poet before,
which was all right, because Karkasy
had never seen a Titan before. ‘You
should stay here, sir,’ the soldier
said, handing the papers back to
Karkasy. ‘But this is pointless,’
Karkasy said. ‘I have been sent to
make a memorial of these events. I
can’t get close to anything. I
can’t even hear properly what that
1,5,15
fool’s got to say. Can you imagine
the wrong-headedness of this? Momus
isn’t even history. He’s just
another kind of memorialist. I’ve
been allowed here to remember his
remembrance, and I can’t even do
that properly. I’m so far removed
from the things I should be engaging
with, I might as well have stayed on
Terra and made do with a
telescope.’ The soldier shrugged.
He’d lost the thread of Karkasy’s
speech early on. ‘You should stay
here, sir. For your own safety.’
‘I was told the city had been made
safe,’ Karkasy said. ‘We’re
only a day or two from compliance,
aren’t we?’ The soldier leaned
1,5,16
forward discreetly, so close that
Karkasy could smell the stale odour
of garbage the heat was infusing into
his breath. ‘Just between us,
that’s the official line, but there
has been trouble. Insurgents.
Loyalists. You always get it in a
conquered city, no matter how clean
the victory. The back streets are not
secure.’ ‘Really?’ ‘They’re
saying loyalists, but it’s just
discontent, if you ask me. These
bastards have lost it all, and
they’re not happy about it.’
Karkasy nodded. ‘Thanks for the
tip,’ he said, and turned back to
rejoin the crowd. Five minutes later,
with Momus still droning on and
1,5,17
Karkasy close to despair, an elderly
noblewoman in the crowd fainted, and
there was a small  commotion. The
soldiers hurried in to take charge of
the situation and carry her into the
shade. When the soldier’s back was
turned, Karkasy took himself off out
of the square and into the streets
beyond. He walked for a while through
empty courts and high-walled streets
where shadows pooled like water. The
day’s heat was still pitiless, but
moving around made it more bearable.
Periodic breezes gusted down
alleyways, but they were not at all
relieving. Most were so full of sand
and grit that Karkasy had to turn his
back to them and close his eyes until
1,5,18
they abated. The streets were vacant,
except for an occasional figure
hunched in the shadows of a doorway,
or half-visible behind broken
shutters. He wondered if anybody
would respond if he approached them,
but felt reluctant to try. The
silence was penetrating, and to break
it would have felt as improper as
disturbing a mourning vigil. He was
alone, properly alone for the first
time in over a year, and master of
his own actions. It felt tremendously
liberating. He could go where he
pleased, and quickly began to
exercise that privilege, taking
street turns at random, walking where
his feet took him. For a while, he
1,5,19
kept the stillunmoving Titan in
sight, as a point of reference, but
it was soon eclipsed by towers and
high roofs, so he resigned himself to
getting lost. Getting lost would be
liberating too. There were always the
great towers of the palace. He could
follow those back to their roots if
necessary. War had ravaged many parts
of the city he passed through.
Buildings had toppled into white and
dusty heaps of slag, or been reduced
to their very basements. Others were
roofless, or burned out, or wounded
in their structures, or simply
rendered into facades, their innards
blown out, standing like the wooden
flats of stage scenery. Craters and
1,5,20
shell holes pock-marked certain
pavements, or the surfaces of
metalled roads, sometimes forming
strange rows and patterns, as if
their arrangement was deliberate, or
concealed, by some secret code, great
truths of life and death. There was a
smell in the dry, hot air, like
burning or blood or ordure, yet none
of those things. A mingled scent, an
afterscent. It wasn’t burning he
could smell, it was things burnt. It
wasn’t blood, it was dry residue.
It wasn’t ordure, it was the
seeping consequence of sewer systems
broken and cracked by the
bombardment. Many streets had stacks
of belongings piled up along the
1,5,21
pavements. Furniture, bundles of
clothing, kitchenware. A great deal
of it was in disrepair, and had
evidently been recovered from ruined
dwellings. Other piles seemed more
intact, the items carefully packed in
trunks and coffers. People were
intending to quit the city, he
realised. They had piled up their
possessions in readiness while they
tried to procure transportation, or
perhaps the relevant permission from
the occupying authorities. Almost
every street and yard bore some
slogan or other notice upon its
walls. All were hand written, in a
great variety of styles and degrees
of calligraphic skill. Some were
1,5,22
daubed in pitch, others paint or dye,
others chalk or charcoal – the
latter, Karkasy reasoned, marks made
by the employment of burnt sticks and
splinters taken from the ruins. Many
were indecipherable, or unfathomable.
Many were bold, angry graffiti,
splenetically cursing the invaders or
defiantly announcing a surviving
spark of resistance. They called for
death, for uprising, for revenge.
Others were lists, carefully
recording the names of the citizens
who had died in that place, or
plaintive requests for news about the
missing loved ones listed below.
Others were agonised statements of
lament, or minutely and delicately
1,5,23
transcribed texts of some sacred
significance. Karkasy found himself
increasingly captivated by them, by
the variation and contrast of them,
and the emotions they conveyed. For
the first time, the first true and
proper time since he’d left Terra,
he felt the poet in him respond. This
feeling excited him. He had begun to
fear that he might have accidentally
left his poetry behind on Terra in
his hurry to embark, or at least that
it malingered, folded and unpacked,
in his quarters on the ship, like his
least favourite shirt. He felt the
muse return, and it made him smile,
despite the heat and the
mummification of his throat. It
1,5,24
seemed apt, after all, that it should
be words that brought words back into
his mind. He took out his chapbook
and his pen. He was a man of
traditional inclinations, believing
that no great lyric could ever be
composed on the screen of a data-
slate, a point of variance that had
almost got him into a fist fight with
Palisad Hadray, the other ‘poet of
note’ amongst the remembrancer
group. That had been near the start
of their conveyance to join the
expedition, during one of the
informal dinners held to allow the
remembrancers to get to  know one
another. He would have won the fight,
if it had come to it. He was fairly
1,5,25
sure of that. Even though Hadray was
an especially large and fierce woman.
Karkasy favoured notebooks of thick,
cream cartridge paper, and at the
start of his long, feted career, had
sourced a supplier in one of
Terra’s arctic hives, who
specialised in antique methods of
paper manufacture. The firm was
called Bondsman, and it offered a
particularly pleasing quarto chapbook
of fifty leaves, bound in a case of
soft, black kid, with an elasticated
strap to keep it closed. The Bondsman
Number 7. Karkasy, a sallow,
rawheaded youth back then, had paid a
significant proportion of his first
royalty income for an order of two
1,5,26
hundred. The volumes had come, packed
head to toe, in a waxed box lined
with tissue paper, which had smelled,
to him at least, of genius and
potential. He had used the books
sparingly, leaving not one precious
page unfilled before starting a new
one. As his fame grew, and his
earnings soared, he had often thought
about ordering another box, but
always stopped when he realised he
had over half the original shipment
still to use up. All his great works
had been composed upon the pages of
Bondsman Number 7’s. His Fanfare to
Unity , all eleven of his Imperial
Cantos , his , even the meritorious
and much republished Reflections and
1,5,27
Ocean Poems Odes, written in his
thirtieth year, which had secured his
reputation and won him the Ethiopic
Laureate. The year before his
selection to the role of
remembrancer, after what had been, in
all fairness, a decade of
unproductive doldrums that had seen
him living off past glories, he had
decided to rejuvenate his muse by
placing an order for another box. He
had been dismayed to discover that
Bondsman had ceased operation. Ignace
Karkasy had nine unused volumes left
in his possession. He had brought
them all with him on the voyage. But
for an idiot scribble or two, their
pages were unmarked. On a blazing,
1,5,28
dusty street corner in the broken
city, he took the chapbook out of his
coat pocket, and slid off the strap.
He found his pen – an antique
plunger-action fountain, for his
traditionalist tastes applied as much
to the means of marking as what
should be marked – and began to
write. The heat had almost congealed
the ink in his nib, but he wrote
anyway, copying out such pieces of
wall writing as affected him,
sometimes attempting to duplicate the
manner and form of their delineation.
He recorded one or two at first, as
he moved from street to street, and
then became more inclusive, and began
to mark down almost every slogan he
1,5,29
saw. It gave him satisfaction and
delight to do this. He could feel,
quite definitely, a lyric beginning
to form, taking shape from the words
he read and recorded. It would be
superlative. After years of absence,
the muse had flown back into his soul
as if it had never been away. He
realised he had lost track of time.
Though it was still stifling hot and
bright, the hour was late, and the
blazing sun had worked its way over,
lower in the sky. He had filled
almost twenty pages, almost half his
chapbook. He felt a sudden pang. What
if he had only nine volumes of genius
left in him? What if that box of
Bondsman Number 7’s, delivered so
1,5,30
long ago, represented the creative
limits of his career? He shuddered,
chilled despite the clinging heat,
and put his chapbook and pen away. He
was standing on a lonely, war-scabbed
street-corner, persecuted by the sun,
unable to fathom which direction to
turn. For the first time since
escaping Peeter Egon Momus’s
presentation, Karkasy felt afraid. He
felt that eyes were watching him from
the blind ruins. He began to retrace
his steps, slouching through gritty
shadow and dusty light. Only once or
twice did a new graffito persuade him
to stop and take out his chapbook
again. He’d been walking for some
time, in circles probably, for all
1,5,31
the streets had begun to look the
same, when he found the eating house.
It occupied the ground floor and
basement of a large basalt tenement,
and bore no sign, but the smell of
cooking announced its purpose. Door-
shutters had been opened onto the
street, and there was a handful of
tables set out. For the first time,
he saw people in numbers. Locals, in
dark sun cloaks and shawls, as
unresponsive and indolent as the few
souls he had glimpsed in doorways.
They were sitting at the tables under
a tattered awning, alone or in small,
silent groups, drinking thimble
glasses of liquor or eating food from
finger bowls. Karkasy remembered the
1,5,32
state of his throat, and his belly
remembered itself with a groan. He
walked inside, into the shade,
nodding politely to the patrons. None
responded. In the cold gloom, he
found a wooden bar with a dresser
behind it, laden with glassware and
spouted bottles. The hostel keeper,
an old woman in a  khaki wrap, eyed
him suspiciously from behind the
serving counter. ‘Hello,’ he
said. She frowned back. ‘Do you
understand me?’ he asked. She
nodded slowly. ‘That’s good, very
good. I had been told our languages
were largely the same, but that there
were some accent and dialect
differences.’ He trailed off. The
1,5,33
old woman said something that might
have been ‘What?’ or might have
been any number of curses or
interrogatives. ‘You have food?’
he asked. Then he mimed eating. She
continued to stare at him.
‘Food?’ he asked. She replied
with a flurry of guttural words, none
of which he could make out. Either
she didn’t have food, or was
unwilling to serve him, or she
didn’t have any food for the likes
of him. ‘Something to drink
then?’ he asked. No response. He
mimed drinking, and when that brought
nothing, pointed at the bottles
behind her. She turned and took down
one of the glass containers,
1,5,34
selecting one as if he had indicated
it directly instead of generally. It
was three-quarters full of a clear,
oily fluid that roiled in the gloom.
She thumped it onto the counter, and
then put a thimble glass beside it.
‘Very good,’ he smiled. ‘Very,
very good. Well done. Is this local?
Ah ha! Of course it is, of course it
is. A local speciality? You’re not
going to tell me, are you? Because
you have no idea what I’m actually
saying, have you?’ She stared
blankly at him. He picked up the
bottle and poured a measure into the
glass. The liquor flowed as slowly
and heavily through the spout as his
ink had done from his pen in the
1,5,35
street. He put the bottle down and
lifted the glass, toasting her.
‘Your health,’ he said brightly,
‘and to the prosperity of your
world. I know things are hard now,
but trust me, this is all for the
best. All for the very best.’ He
swigged the drink. It tasted of
liquorice and went down very well,
heating his dry gullet and lighting a
buzz in his gut. ‘Excellent,’ he
said, and poured himself a second.
‘Very good indeed. You’re not
going to answer me, are you? I could
ask your name and your  lineage and
anything at all, and you would just
stand there like a statue, wouldn’t
you? Like a Titan?’ He sank the
1,5,36
second glass and poured a third. He
felt very good about himself now,
better than he had done for hours,
better even than when the muse had
flown back to him in the streets. In
truth, drink had always been a more
welcome companion to Ignace Karkasy
than any muse, though he would never
have been willing to admit it, or to
admit the fact that his affection for
drink had long weighed down his
career, like rocks in a sack. Drink
and his muse, both beloved of him,
each pulling in opposite directions.
He drank his third glass, and tipped
out a fourth. Warmth infused him, a
biological warmth much more welcome
than the brutal heat of the day. It
1,5,37
made him smile. It revealed to him
how extraordinary this false Terra
was, how complex and intoxicating. He
felt love for it, and pity, and
tremendous goodwill. This world, this
place, this hostelry, would not be
forgotten. Suddenly remembering
something else, he apologised to the
old woman, who had remained facing
him across the counter like a fugued
servitor, and reached into his
pocket. He had currency – Imperial
coin and plastek wafers. He made a
pile of them on the stained and
glossy bartop. ‘Imperial,’ he
said, ‘but you take that. I mean,
you’re obliged to. I was told that
by the iterators this morning.
1,5,38
Imperial currency is legal tender
now, to replace your local coin.
Terra, you don’t know what I’m
saying, do you? How much do I owe
you?’ No answer. He sipped his
fourth drink and pushed the pile of
cash towards her. ‘You decide,
then. You tell me. Take for the whole
bottle.’ He tapped his finger
against the side of the flask. ‘The
whole bottle? How much?’ He grinned
and nodded at the money. The old
woman looked at the heap, reached out
a bony hand and picked up a five
aquila piece. She studied it for a
moment, then spat on it and threw it
at Karkasy. The coin bounced off his
belly and fell onto the floor.
1,5,39
Karkasy blinked and then laughed. The
laughter boomed out of him, hard and
joyous, and he was quite unable to
keep it in. The old woman stared at
him. Her eyes widened ever so
slightly. Karkasy lifted up the
bottle and the glass. ‘I tell you
what,’ he said. ‘Keep it all. All
of it.’ He walked away and found an
empty table in the corner of the
place. He sat  down and poured
another drink, looking about him.
Some of the silent patrons were
staring at him. He nodded back,
cheerfully. They looked so human, he
thought, and realised it was a
ridiculous thing to think, because
they were without a doubt human. But
1,5,40
at the same time, they weren’t.
Their drab clothes, their drab
manner, the set of their features,
their way of sitting and looking and
eating. They seemed a little like
animals, manshaped creatures trained
to ape human behaviour, yet not quite
accomplished in that art. ‘Is that
what five thousand years of
separation does to a species?’ he
asked aloud. No one answered, and
some of his watchers turned away. Was
that what five thousand years did to
the divided branches of mankind? He
took another sip. Biologically
identical, but for a few strands of
genetic inheritance, and yet
culturally grown so far apart. These
1,5,41
were men who lived and walked and
drank and shat, just as he did. They
lived in houses and raised cities,
and wrote upon walls and even spoke
the same language, old women not
withstanding. Yet time and division
had grown them along alternate paths.
Karkasy saw that clearly now. They
were a graft from the rootstock,
grown under another sun, similar yet
alien. Even the way they sat at
tables and sipped at drinks. Karkasy
stood up suddenly. The muse had
abruptly jostled the pleasure of
drink out of the summit of his mind.
He bowed to the old woman as he
collected up his glass and two-thirds
empty bottle, and said, ‘My thanks,
1,5,42
madam,’ Then he teetered back out
into the sunlight. He found a vacant
lot a few streets away that had been
levelled to rubble by bombing, and
perched himself on a chunk of basalt.
Setting down the bottle and the glass
carefully, he took out his half-
filled Bondsman Number 7 and began to
write again, forming the first few
stanzas of a lyric that owed much to
the writings on the walls and the
insight he had garnered in the
hostelry. It flowed well for a while,
and then dried up. He took another
drink, trying to restart his inner
voice. Tiny black ant-like insects
milled industriously in the rubble
around him, as if trying to rebuild
1,5,43
their own miniature lost city. He had
to brush one off the open page of his
chapbook. Others raced exploratively
over the toe-caps of his boots in a
frenetic expedition. He stood up,
imagining itches, and decided this
wasn’t a place to sit. He gathered
up his bottle and his glass, taking
another sip once he’d fished out
the ant floating in it with his
finger. A building of considerable
size and magnificence faced him
across the damaged lot. He wondered
what it was. He stumbled over the
rubble towards it, almost losing his
footing on the loose rocks from time
to time. What was it – a municipal
hall, a library, a school? He
1,5,44
wandered around it, admiring the fine
rise of the walls and the decorated
headers of the stonework. Whatever it
was, the building was important.
Miraculously, it had been spared the
destruction visited on its
neighbouring lots. Karkasy found the
entrance, a towering arch of stone
filled with copper doors. They
weren’t locked. He pushed his way
in. The interior of the building was
so profoundly and refreshingly cool
it almost made him gasp. It was a
single space, an arched roof raised
on massive ouslite pillars, the floor
dressed in cold onyx. Under the end
windows, some kind of stone structure
rose. Karkasy paused. He put down his
1,5,45
bottle beside the base of one of the
pillars, and advanced down the centre
of the building with his glass in his
hand. He knew there was a word for a
place like this. He searched for it.
Sunlight, filleted by coloured glass,
slanted through the thin windows. The
stone structure at the end of the
chamber was a carved lectern
supporting a very massive and very
old book. Karkasy touched the
crinkled parchment of the book’s
open pages with delight. It appealed
to him the same way as the pages of a
Bondsman Number 7 did. The sheets
were old, and faded, covered with
ornate black script and hand-coloured
images. This was an altar, he
1,5,46
realised. This place, a temple, a
fane! ‘Terra alive!’ he declared,
and then winced as his words echoed
back down the cool vault. History had
taught him about fanes and religious
belief, but he had never before set
foot inside such a place. A place of
sprits and divinity. He sensed that
the spirits were looking down on his
intrusion with disapproval, and then
laughed at his own idiocy. There were
no spirits. Not anywhere in the
cosmos. Imperial Truth had taught him
that. The only spirits in this
building were the ones in his glass
and his belly. He looked at the pages
again. Here was the truth of it, the
crucial mark of  difference between
1,5,47
his breed of man and the local
variety. They were heathens. They
continued to embrace the
superstitions that the fundamental
strand of mankind had set aside. Here
was the promise of an afterlife, and
an ethereal world. Here was the
nonsense of a faith in the
intangible. Karkasy knew that there
were some, many perhaps, amongst the
population of the compliant Imperium,
who longed for a return to those
ways. God, in every incarnation and
pantheon, was long perished, but
still men hankered after the
ineffable. Despite prosecution, new
credos and budding religions were
sprouting up amongst the cultures of
1,5,48
Unified Man. Most vigorous of all was
the Imperial Creed that insisted
humanity adopt the Emperor as a
divine being. A God-Emperor of
Mankind. The idea was ludicrous and,
officially, heretical. The Emperor
had always refused such adoration in
the most stringent terms, denying his
apotheosis. Some said it would only
happen after his death, and as he was
functionally immortal, that tended to
cap the argument. Whatever his
powers, whatever his capacity,
whatever his magnificence as the
finest and most gloriously total
leader of the species, he was still
just a man. The Emperor liked to
remind mankind of this whenever he
1,5,49
could. It was an edict that rattled
around the bureaucracies of the
expanding Imperium. The Emperor is
the Emperor, and he is great and
everlasting. But he is not a god, and
he refuses any worship offered to
him. Karkasy took a swig and put his
empty thimble-glass down, at an angle
on the edge of the lectern shelf. The
Lectitio Divinitatus, that’s what
it was called. The missal of the
underground wellspring that strove,
in secret, to establish the Cult of
the Emperor, against his will. It was
said that even some of the upstanding
members of the Council of Terra
supported its aims. The Emperor as
god. Karkasy stifled a laugh. Five
1,5,50
thousand years of blood, war and fire
to expunge all gods from the culture,
and now the man who achieved that
goal supplants them as a new deity.
‘How foolish is mankind?’ Karkasy
laughed, enjoying the way his words
echoed around the empty fane. ‘How
desperate and flailing? Is it that we
simply need a concept of god to
fulfill us? Is that part of our make
up?’ He fell silent, considering
the point he had raised to himself. A
good point, well-reasoned. He
wondered where his bottle had gone.
It wasa good point. Maybe that was
mankind’s ultimate weakness. Maybe
it was one of humanity’s basic
impulses, the need to believe in
1,5,51
another,  higher order. Perhaps faith
was like a vacuum, sucking up
credulity in a frantic effort to fill
its own void. Perhaps it was a part
of mankind’s genetic character to
need, to hunger for, a spiritual
solace. ‘Perhaps we are cursed,’
Karkasy told the empty fane, ‘to
crave something which does not exist.
There are no gods, no spirits, no
daemons. So we make them up, to
comfort ourselves.’ The fane seemed
oblivious to his ramblings. He took
hold of his empty glass and wandered
back to where he had left the bottle.
Another drink. He left the fane and
threaded his way out into the
blinding sunlight. The heat was so
1,5,52
intense that he had to take another
swig. Karkasy wobbled down a few
streets, away from the temple, and
heard a rushing, roasting noise. He
discovered a team of Imperial
soldiers, stripped to the waist,
using a flamer to erase anti-Imperial
slogans from a wall. They had
evidently been working their way down
the street, for all the walls
displayed swathes of heat burns.
‘Don’t do that,’ he said. The
soldiers turned and looked at him,
their flamer spitting. From his
garments and demeanour, he was
unmistakably not a local. ‘Don’t
do that,’ he said again. ‘Orders,
sir,’ said one of the troopers.
1,5,53
‘What are you doing out here?’
asked another. Karkasy shook his head
and left them alone. He trudged
through narrow alleys and open
courts, sipping from the spout of the
bottle. He found another vacant lot
very similar to the one he had sat
down in before, and placed his rump
upon a scalene block of basalt. He
took out his chapbook and ran through
the stanzas he had written. They were
terrible. He groaned as he read them,
then became angry and tore the
precious pages out. He balled the
thick, cream paper up and tossed it
away into the rubble. Karkasy
suddenly became aware that eyes were
staring at him from the shadows of
1,5,54
doorways and windows. He could barely
make out their shapes, but knew full
well that locals were watching him.
He got up, and quickly retrieved the
balls of crumpled paper he had
discarded, feeling that he had no
right to add in any way to the mess.
He began to hurry down the street, as
thin boys emerged from hiding to lob
stones and jeers after him.  He found
himself, unexpectedly, in the street
of the hostelry again. It was
uninhabited, but he was pleased to
have found it as his bottle had
become unaccountably empty. He went
into the gloom. There was no one
around. Even the old woman had
disappeared. His pile of Imperial
1,5,55
currency lay where he had left it on
the counter. Seeing it, he felt
authorised to help himself to another
bottle from behind the bar. Clutching
the bottle in his hand, he very
carefully sat down at one of the
tables and poured another drink. He
had been sitting there for an
indefinite amount of time when a
voice asked him if he was all right.
Ignace Karkasy blinked and looked up.
The gang of Imperial army troops who
had been burning clean the walls of
the city had entered the hostelry,
and the old woman had reappeared to
fetch them drinks and food. The
officer looked down at Karkasy as his
men took their seats. ‘Are you all
1,5,56
right, sir?’ he asked. ‘Yes. Yes,
yes, yes,’ Karkasy slurred. ‘You
don’t look all right, pardon me for
saying. Should you be out in the
city?’ Karkasy nodded furiously,
tucking into his pocket for his
permit. It wasn’t there. ‘I’m
meant to be here,’ he said,
instead. ‘Meant to. I was ordered
to come. To hear Eater Piton Momus.
Shit, no, that’s wrong. To hear
Peeter Egon Momus present his plans
for the new city. That’s why I’m
here. I’m meant to be.’ The
officer regarded him cautiously.
‘If you say so, sir. They say Momus
has drawn up a wonderful scheme for
the reconstruction.’ ‘Oh yes,
1,5,57
quite wonderful,’ Karkasy replied,
reaching for his bottle and missing.
‘Quite bloody wonderful. An eternal
memorial to our victory here…’
‘Sir?’ ‘It won’t last,’
Karkasy said. ‘No, no. It won’t
last. It can’t. Nothing lasts. You
look like a wise man to me, friend,
what do you think?’ ‘I think you
should be on your way, sir,’ the
officer said gently. ‘No, no, no…
about the city! The city! It won’t
last, Terra take Peeter Egon Momus.
To the dust, all things return. As
far as I can see, this city was
pretty wonderful before we came and
hobbled it.’  ‘Sir, I think–’
‘No, you don’t,’ Karkasy said,
1,5,58
shaking his head. ‘You don’t, and
no one does. This city was supposed
to last forever, but we broke it and
laid it in tatters. Let Momus rebuild
it, it will happen again, and again.
The work of man is destined to
perish. Momus said he plans a city
that will celebrate mankind forever.
You know what? I bet that’s what
the architects who built this place
thought too.’ ‘Sir–’ ‘What
man does comes apart, eventually. You
mark my words. This city, Momus’s
city. The Imperium–’ ‘Sir,
you–’ Karkasy rose to his feet,
blinking and wagging a finger.
‘Don’t “sir” me! The Imperium
will fall asunder as soon as we
1,5,59
construct it! You mark my words!
It’s as inevitable as–’ Pain
abruptly splintered Karkasy’s face,
and he fell down, bewildered. He
registered a frenzy of shouting and
movement, then felt boots and fists
slamming into him, over and over
again. Enraged by his words, the
troopers had fallen upon him.
Shouting, the officer tried to pull
them off. Bones snapped. Blood
spurted from Karkasy’s nostrils.
‘Mark my words!’ he coughed.
‘Nothing we build will last
forever! You ask these bloody
locals!’ A bootcap cracked into his
sternum. Bloody fluid washed into his
mouth. ‘Get off him! Get off
1,5,60
him!’ the officer was yelling,
trying to rein in his provoked and
angry men. By the time he managed to
do so, Ignace Karkasy was no longer
pontificating. Or breathing.  
1,5,61
SIX

Counsel A question well answered Two
gods in one room Torgaddon was
waiting for him in the towering ante-
hall behind the strategium. ‘There
you are,’ he grinned. ‘Here I
am,’ Loken agreed. ‘There will be
a question,’ Torgaddon remarked,
keeping his voice low. ‘It will
seem a minor thing, and will not be
obviously directed to you but be
ready to catch it.’ ‘Me?’
‘No, I was talking to myself. Yes,
you, Garviel! Consider it a baptismal
test. Come on.’ Loken didn’t like
the sound of Torgaddon’s words, but
he appreciated the warning. He
1,6,1
followed Torgaddon down the length of
the ante-hall. It was a perilously
tall, narrow place, with embossed
columns of wood set into the walls
that soared up and branched like
carved trees to support a glass roof
two hundred metres above them,
through which the stars could be
seen. Darkwood panels cased the walls
between the columns, and they were
covered with millions of lines of
hand-painted names and numbers, all
rendered in exquisite gilt lettering.
They were the names of the dead: all
those of the Legions, the army, the
fleet and the Divisio Militaris who
had fallen since the start of the
Great Crusade in actions where this
1,6,2
flagship vessel had been present. The
names of immortal heroes were limned
here on the walls, grouped in columns
below header legends that proclaimed
the world-sites of  famous actions
and hallowed conquests. From this
display, the ante-hall earned its
particular name: the Avenue of Glory
and Lament. The walls of fully two-
thirds of the ante-hall were filled
up with golden names. As the two
striding captains in their glossy
white plate drew closer to the
strategium end, the wall boards
became bare, unoccupied. They passed
a group of hooded necrologists hudd-
led by the last, half-filled panel,
who were carefully stencilling new
1,6,3
names onto the dark wood with gold-
dipped brushes. The latest dead. The
roll call from the High City battle.
The necrologists stopped work and
bowed their heads as the two captains
went by. Torgaddon didn’t spare
them a second glance, but Loken
turned to read the half-writ names.
Some of them were brothers from
Locasta he would never see again. He
could smell the tangy oil suspension
of the gold-leaf the necrologists
were using. ‘Keep up,’ Torgaddon
grunted. High doors, lacquered gold
and crimson, stood closed at the end
of the Avenue Hall. Before them,
Aximand and Abaddon were waiting.
They were likewise fully armoured,
1,6,4
their heads bare, their brush-crested
helms held under their left arms.
Abaddon’s great white shoulder
plates were draped with a black wolf-
pelt. ‘Garviel,’ he smiled. ‘It
doesn’t do to keep him waiting,’
Aximand grumbled. Loken wasn’t sure
if Little Horus meant Abaddon or the
commander. ‘What were you two
gabbing about? Like fishwives, the
pair of you.’ ‘I was just asking
him if he’d settled Vipus in,’
Torgaddon said simply. Aximand
glanced at Loken, his wide-set eyes
languidly half-hooded by his lids.
‘And I was reassuring Tarik that I
had,’ Loken added. Evidently,
Torgaddon’s quiet heads-up had been
1,6,5
for his ears only. ‘Let’s
enter,’ Abaddon said. He raised his
gloved hand and pushed the gold and
crimson doors wide. A short
processional lay before them, a
twenty-metre colonnade of ebon stone
chased with a fretwork of silver
wire. It was lined by forty Guardsmen
of the Imperial army, members of
Varvaras’s own Byzant Janizars,
twenty against each wall. They were
splendidly appointed in full dress
uniforms:  long cream greatcoats with
gold frogging, high-crowned chrome
helms with basket visors and scarlet
cockades, and matching sashes. As the
Mournival came through the doors, the
Janizars brandished their ornate
1,6,6
power lances, beginning with the pair
directly inside the doorway. The
polished blades of the weapons
whirled up into place in series, like
chasing dominoes along the
processional, each facing pair of
weapons locking into position just
before the marching captains caught
up with the ripple. The final pair
came to salute, eyes-front, in
perfect discipline, and the Mournival
stepped past them onto the deck of
the strategium. The strategium was a
great, semicircular platform that
projected like a lip out above the
tiered theatre of the flagship’s
bridge. Far below lay the principal
command level, thronging with
1,6,7
hundreds of uniformed personnel and
burnished aide servitors, tiny as
ants. To either side, the beehive
subdecks of the secondary platforms,
dressed in gold and black ironwork,
rose up, past the level of the
projecting strategium, up into the
roof itself, each storey busy with
Navy staff, operators, cogitation
officers and astropaths. The front
section of the bridge chamber was a
great, strutted window, through which
the constellations and the ink of
space could be witnessed. The
standards of the Luna Wolves and the
Imperial Fists hung from the arching
roof, either side of the staring eye
banner of the Warmaster himself. That
1,6,8
great banner was marked, in golden
thread, with the decree: ‘I am the
Emperor’s Vigilance and the Eye of
Terra.’ Loken remembered the award
of that august symbol with pride
during the great triumph after
Ullanor was done. In all his decades
of service, Loken had only been on
the bridge of the twice before: once
to formally accept his promotion to
Vengeful Spirit captain, and then
again to mark his elevation to the
captaincy of the Tenth. The scale of
the place took his breath away, as it
had done both times before. The
strategium deck itself was an
ironwork platform which supported, at
its centre, a circular dais of plain,
1,6,9
unfinished ouslite, one metre deep
and ten in diameter. The commander
had always eschewed any form of
throne or seat. The ironwork walk
space around the dais was half-
shadowed by the overhang of tiered
galleries that climbed the slopes of
the chamber behind it. Glancing up,
Loken saw huddles of senior
iterators, tacticians, ship captains
of the expedition fleet and other
notables gathering to view the
proceedings. He looked for
Sindermann, but couldn’t find his
face.  Several attendant figures
stood quietly around the edges of the
dais. Lord Commander Hektor Varvaras,
marshal of the expedition’s army, a
1,6,10
tall, precise aristocrat in red
robes, stood discussing the content
of a data-slate with two formally
uniformed army aides. Boas Comnenus,
Master of the Fleet, waited, drumming
steel fingers on the edge of the
ouslite plinth. He was a squat bear
of a man, his ancient, flaccid body
encased in a superb silver-and-steel
exo-skeleton, further draped in robes
of deep, rich, selpic blue. Neatly
machined ocular lenses whirred and
exchanged in the augmetic frame that
supplanted his long-dead eyes. Ing
Mae Sing, the expedition’s Mistress
of Astropaths, stood to the
master’s left, a gaunt, blind
spectre in a hooded white gown, and,
1,6,11
round from her, in order, the High
Senior of the Navis Nobilite,
Navigator Chorogus, the Master
Companion of Vox, the Master
Companion of Lucidation, the senior
tacticae, the senior heraldists, and
various gubernatorial legates. Each
one, Loken noticed, had placed a
single personal item on the edge of
the dais where they stood: a glove, a
cap, a wand-stave. ‘We stay in the
shadows,’ Torgaddon told him,
bringing Loken up short under the
edge of the shade cast by the balcony
above. ‘This is the Mournival’s
place, apart, yet present.’ Loken
nodded, and remained with Torgaddon
and Aximand in the symbolic shadow of
1,6,12
the overhang. Abaddon stepped forward
into the light, and took his place at
the edge of the dais between
Varvarus, who nodded pleasantly to
him, and Comnenus, who didn’t.
Abaddon placed his helm upon the edge
of the ouslite disc. ‘An item
placed on the dais registers a desire
to be heard and noted,’ Torgaddon
told Loken. ‘Ezekyle has a place by
dint of his status as first captain.
For now, he will speak as first
captain, not as the Mournival.’
‘Will I get the hang of this
ever?’ Loken asked. ‘No, not at
all,’ Torgaddon said. Then he
grinned. ‘Yes, you will. Of course,
you will!’ Loken noticed another
1,6,13
figure, removed from the main
assembly. The man, if it were a man,
lurked at the rail of the strategium
deck, gazing out across the chasm of
the bridge. He was a machine, it
seemed, much more a machine than a
man. Vague relics of flesh and muscle
remained in the skeletal fabric of
his mechanical body, a fabulously
wrought armature of gold and steel.
‘Who is that?’ Loken whispered.
‘Regulus,’ Aximand replied
curtly. ‘Adept of the
Mechanicum.’ So that was what a
Mechanicum adept looked like, Loken
thought. That was the sort of being
who could command the invincible
Titans into war. ‘Hush now,’
1,6,14
Torgaddon said, tapping Loken on the
arm. Plated glass doors on the other
side of the platform slid open, and
laughter boomed out. A huge figure
came out onto the strategium, talking
and laughing animatedly, along with a
diminutive presence who scuttled to
keep up. Everybody dropped in a bow.
Loken, going down on one knee, could
hear the rustle of others bowing in
the steep balconies above him. Boas
Comnenus did so slowly, because his
exoskeleton was ancient. Adept
Regulus did so slowly, not because
his machine body was stiff, but
rather because he was clearly
reluctant. Warmaster Horus looked
around, smiled, and then leapt up
1,6,15
onto the dais in a single bound. He
stood at the centre of the ouslite
disc, and turned slowly. ‘My
friends,’ he said. ‘Honour’s
done. Up you get.’ Slowly, they
rose and beheld him. He was as
magnificent as ever, Loken thought.
Massive and limber, a demi-god
manifest, wrapped in white-gold
armour and pelts of fur. His head was
bare. Shaven, sculptural, his face
was noble, deeply tanned by multiple
sunlights, his wide-spaced eyes
bright, his teeth gleaming. He smiled
and nodded to each and every one of
them. He had such vitality, like a
force of nature – a tornado, a
tempest, an avalanche – trapped in
1,6,16
humanoid form and distilled, the
potential locked in. He rotated
slowly on the dais, grinning, nodding
to some, pointing out certain friends
with a familiar laugh. The primarch
looked at Loken, back in the shadows
of the overhang, and his smile seemed
to broaden for a second. Loken felt a
shudder of fear. It was pleasant and
vigorous. Only the Warmaster could
make an Astartes feel that.
‘Friends,’ Horus said. His voice
was like honey, like steel, like a
whisper, like all of those things
mixed as one. ‘My dear friends and
comrades of the 63rd Expedition, is
it really that time again?’
Laughter rippled around the deck, and
1,6,17
from the galleries above. ‘Briefing
time,’ Horus chuckled, ‘and I
salute you all for coming here to
bear the tedium of yet another
session. I promise I’ll keep you no
longer than  is necessary. First
though…’ Horus jumped back down
off the dais and stooped to place a
sheltering arm around the tiny
shoulders of the man who had
accompanied him out of the inner
chamber, like a father showing off a
small child to his brothers. So
embraced, the man fixed a stiff,
sickly grin upon his face, more a
desperate grimace than a show of
pleasure. ‘Before we begin,’
Horus said, ‘I want to talk about
1,6,18
my good friend Peeter Egon Momus
here. How I deserved… pardon me,
how humanity deserved an architect as
fine and gifted as this, I don’t
know. Peeter has been telling me
about his designs for the new High
City here, and they are wonderful.
Wonderful, wonderful.’ ‘Really, I
don’t know, my lord…’ Momus
harrumphed, his rictus trembling. The
architect designate was beginning to
shake, enduring direct exposure to
such supreme attention. ‘Our lord
the Emperor himself sent Peeter to
us,’ Horus told them. ‘He knew
his worth. You see, I don’t want to
conquer. Conquest of itself is so
messy, isn’t it Ezekyle?’ ‘Yes,
1,6,19
lord,’ Abaddon murmured. ‘How can
we draw the lost outposts of man back
into one harmonious whole if all we
bring them is conquest? We are duty-
bound to leave them better than we
found them, enlightened by the
communication of the Imperial Truth
and dazzlingly made over as august
provinces of our wide estate. This
expedition – and all expeditions
– must look to the future and be
mindful that what we leave in our
wake must stand as an enduring
statement of our intent, especially
upon worlds, as here, where we have
been forced to inflict damage in the
promulgation of our message. We must
leave legacies behind us. Imperial
1,6,20
cities, monuments to the new age, and
fitting memorials to those who have
fallen in the struggle to establish
it. Peeter, my friend Peeter here,
understands this. I urge you all to
take the time to visit his workshops
and review his marvellous schemes.
And I look forward to seeing the
genius of his vision gracing all the
new cities we build in the course of
our crusade.’ Applause broke out.
‘A-all the new cities…’ Momus
coughed. ‘Peeter is the man for the
job,’ Horus cried, ignoring the
architect’s muted gasp. ‘I am at
one with the way he perceives
architecture as celebration. He
understands, like no other, I
1,6,21
believe, how the spirit of the
crusade may be  realised in steel and
glass and stone. What we raise up is
far more important than what we
strike down. What we leave behind us,
men must admire for eternity, and say
“This was well done indeed. This is
what the Imperium means, and without
it we would be shadows”. For that,
Peeter’s our man. Let’s laud him
now!’ A huge explosion of applause
rang out across the vast chamber.
Many officers in the command tiers
below joined in. Peeter Egon Momus
looked slightly glazed as he was led
off the strategium by an aide. Horus
leapt back onto the dais. ‘Let’s
begin… my worthy adept?’ Regulus
1,6,22
stepped towards the edge of the dais
and put a polished machinecog down
delicately on the lip of the ouslite.
When he spoke, his voice was
augmented and inhuman, like an
electric wind brushing through the
boughs of steel trees. ‘My lord
Warmaster, the Mechanicum is
satisfied with this rock. We continue
to study, with great interest, the
technologies captured here. The
gravitic and phasic weapons are being
reverse-engineered in our forges. At
last report, three standard template
construct patterns, previously
unknown to us, have been
recovered.’ Horus clapped his hands
together. ‘Glory to our brothers of
1,6,23
the tireless Mechanicum! Slowly, we
piece together the missing parts of
humanity’s knowledge. The Emperor
will be delighted, as will, I’m
sure, your Martian lords.’ Regulus
nodded, lifting up the cog and
stepping back from the dais. Horus
looked around. ‘Rakris? My dear
Rakris?’ Lord Governor Elect
Rakris, a portly man in dove-grey
robes, had already placed his
sceptre-wand on the edge of the dais
to mark his participation. Now he
fiddled with it as he made his
report. Horus heard him out
patiently, nodding encouragingly from
time to time. Rakris droned on, at
unnecessary length. Loken felt sorry
1,6,24
for him. One of Lord Commander
Varvaras’s generals, Rakris had
been selected to remain at Sixty-
Three Nineteen as governor overseer,
marshalling the occupation forces as
the world transmuted into a full
Imperial state. Rakris was a career
soldier, and it was clear that,
though he took his election as a
signal honour, he was quite aghast at
the prospect of being left behind. He
looked pale and ill, brooding on the
time, not long away, when the
expedition fleet left him to manage
the work alone. Rakris was Terran
born, and Loken knew that once the
fleet sailed on and left him to his
job, Rakris would feel as abandoned
1,6,25
as if he had been marooned.  A
governorship was intended to be the
ultimate reward for a war-hero’s
service, but it seemed to Loken a
quietly terrible fate: to be monarch
of a world, and then cast away upon
it. Forever. The crusade would not be
back to visit conquered worlds in a
hurry. ‘…in truth, my
commander,’ Rakris was saying,
‘it may be many decades until this
world achieves a state of equity with
the Imperium. There is great
opposition.’ ‘How far are we from
compliance?’ Horus asked, looking
around. Varvaras replied. ‘True
compliance, lord? Decades, as my good
friend Rakris says. Functional
1,6,26
compliance? Well, that is different.
There is a seed of dissidence in the
southern hemisphere that we cannot
quench. Until that is brought into
line, this world cannot be
certified.’ Horus nodded. ‘So we
stay here, if we must, until the job
is done. We must hold over our plans
to advance. Such a shame…’ The
primarch’s smile faded for a second
as he pondered. ‘Unless there is
another suggestion?’ He looked at
Abaddon and let the words hang.
Abaddon seemed to hesitate, and
glanced quickly back into the shadows
behind him. Loken realised that this
was the question. This was a moment
of counsel when the primarch looked
1,6,27
outside the official hierarchy of the
expedition’s command echelon for
the informal advice of his chosen
inner circle. Torgaddon nudged Loken,
but the nudge was unnecessary. Loken
had already stepped forward into the
light behind Abaddon. ‘My lord
Warmaster,’ Loken said, almost
startled by the sound of his own
voice. ‘Captain Loken,’ Horus
said with a delighted flash of his
eyes. ‘The thoughts of the
Mournival are always welcome at my
counsel.’ Several present,
including Varvaras, made approving
sounds. ‘My lord, the initial phase
of the war here was undertaken
quickly and cleanly,’ Loken said.
1,6,28
‘A surgical strike by the speartip
against the enemy’s head to
minimise the loss and hardship that
both sides would suffer in a longer,
full-scale offensive. A guerilla war
against insurgents would inevitably
be an arduous, drawn out, costly
affair. It could last for years
without resolution, eroding Lord
Commander Varvaras’s precious army
resources and blighting any good
beginning of the Lord Governor
Elect’s rule. Sixty-Three Nineteen
cannot afford it, and neither can the
expedition. I  say, and if I speak
out of turn, forgive me, I say that
if the speartip was meant to conquer
this world in one, clean blow, it has
1,6,29
failed. The work is not yet done.
Order the Legion to finish the
job.’ Murmuring sprang up all
around. ‘You’d have me unleash
the Luna Wolves again, captain?’
Horus asked. Loken shook his head.
‘Not the Legion as a whole, sir.
Tenth Company. We were first in, and
for that we have been praised, but
the praise was not deserved, for the
job is not done.’ Horus nodded, as
if quite taken with this.
‘Varvaras?’ ‘The army always
welcomes the support of the noble
Legion. The insurgent factions might
plague my men for months, as the
captain rightly points out, and make
a great tally of killing before they
1,6,30
are done with. A company of Luna
Wolves could crush them utterly and
end their mutiny.’ ‘Rakris?’
‘An expedient solution would be a
weight off my back, sir,’ Rakris
said. He smiled. ‘It would be a
hammer to crush a nut, perhaps, but
it would be emphatic. The work would
be done, and quickly.’ ‘First
captain?’ ‘The Mournival speaks
with one voice, lord,’ Abaddon
said. ‘I urge for a swift
conclusion to our business here, so
that Sixty-Three Nineteen can get on
with its life, and we can get on with
the crusade.’ ‘So it shall be,’
Horus said, smiling broadly again.
‘So I make a command of it.
1,6,31
Captain, have Tenth Company drawn
ready and oathed to the moment. We
will anticipate news of your success
eagerly. Thank you for speaking your
mind plainly, and for cutting to the
quick of this thorny problem.’
There was a firm flutter of approving
applause. ‘Then possibilities open
for us after all,’ Horus said.
‘We can begin to prepare for the
next phase. When I signal him…’
Horus looked at the blind Mistress of
Astropaths, who nodded silently
‘…our beloved Emperor will be
delighted to learn that our portion
of the crusade is about to advance
again. We should now discuss the
options open to us. I thought to
1,6,32
brief you on our findings concerning
these myself, but there is another
who positively insists he is fit to
do it.’ Everyone present turned to
look as the plate glass doors slid
open for a second time. The primarch
began to clap, and the applause
gathered and swept around the
galleries, as Maloghurst limped out
onto the stage of the  strategium. It
was the equerry’s first formal
appearance since his recovery from
the surface. Maloghurst was a veteran
Luna Wolf, and a ‘Son of Horus’
to boot. He had been in his time a
company captain, and might even have
risen to the first captaincy had he
not been promoted to the office of
1,6,33
equerry. A shrewd and experienced
soul, Maloghurst’s talents for
intrigue and intelligence ideally
served him in that role, and had long
since earned him the title
‘Twisted’. He took no shame in
this. The Legion might protect the
Warmaster physically, but he
protected him politically, guiding
and advising, blocking and
outplaying, aware and perfectly
sensitive to every nuance and current
in the expedition’s hierarchy. He
had never been well-liked, for he was
a hard man to get close to, even by
the intimidating standards of the
Astartes, and he had never made any
particular effort to be liked. Most
1,6,34
thought of him as a neutral power, a
facilitator, loyal only to Horus
himself. No one was ever foolish
enough to underestimate him. But
circumstance had suddenly made him
popular. Beloved almost. Believed
dead, he had been found alive, and in
the light of Sejanus’s death, this
had been taken as some compensation.
The work of the remembrancer Euphrati
Keeler had cemented his new role as
the noble, wounded hero as the picts
of his unexpected rescue had flashed
around the fleet. Now the assembly
welcomed him back rapturously,
cheering his fortitude and resolve.
He had been reinvented through
misfortune into an adored hero. Loken
1,6,35
was quite sure Maloghurst was aware
of this ironic turn, and fully
prepared to make the most of it.
Maloghurst came out into the open.
His injuries had been so severe that
he was not yet able to clothe himself
in the armour of the Legion, and wore
instead a white robe with the
wolf’s head emblem embroidered on
the back. A gold signet in the shape
of the Warmaster’s icon, the
staring eye, formed the cloak’s
clasp under his throat. He limped,
and walked with the aid of a metal
staff. His back bulged with a
kyphotic misalignment. His face,
drawn thin and pale since last it had
been seen, was lined with effort, and
1,6,36
waddings of synthetic skin-gel
covered gashes upon his throat and
the left side of his head. Loken was
shocked to see that he was now truly
twisted. The old, mocking nickname
suddenly seemed crass and indelicate.
Horus got down off the dais and threw
his arms around his equerry.
Varvaras and Abaddon both went over
to greet him with warm embraces.
Maloghurst smiled, and nodded to
them, then nodded and waved up to the
galleries around to acknowledge the
welcome. As the applause abated,
Maloghurst leaned heavily against the
side of the dais, and placed his
staff upon it in the ceremonial
manner. Instead of returning to his
1,6,37
place, the Warmaster stood back, away
from the circle, giving his equerry
centre stage. ‘I have enjoyed,’
Maloghurst began, his voice hard, but
brittle with effort, ‘a certain
luxury of relaxation in these last
few days.’ Laughter rattled out
from all sides, and the clapping
resumed for a moment. ‘Bed rest,’
Maloghurst went on, ‘that bane of a
warrior’s life, has suited me well,
for it has given me ample opportunity
to review the intelligence gathered
in these last few months by our
advance scouts. However, bed rest, as
a thing to be enjoyed, has its
limits. I insisted that I be allowed
to present this evidence to you today
1,6,38
for, Emperor bless me, never in my
dreams did I imagine I would die of
inaction.’ More approving laughter.
Loken smiled. Maloghurst really was
making the best use of his new status
amongst them. He was almost…
likable. ‘To review,’ Maloghurst
said, taking out a control wand and
gesturing with it briefly. ‘Three
key areas are of interest to us at
this juncture.’ His gestures
activated the underdeck hololithic
projectors, and shapes of solid light
came into being above the strategium,
projected so that all in the
galleries could see them. The first
was a rotating image of the world
they orbited, surrounded by graphic
1,6,39
indicators of elliptical alignment
and precession. The spinning world
shrank rapidly until it became part
of a system arrangement, similarly
draped in schematic overlays, a
turning, three-dimensional orrery
suspended in the air. Then that too
shrank and became a small,
highlighted component in a mosaic of
stars. ‘First,’ Maloghurst said,
‘this area here, itemised eight
fifty-eight oneseven, the cluster
adjacent to our current locale.’ A
particular stellar neighbourhood on
the light map glowed. ‘Our most
obvious and accessible next port of
call. Scout ships report eighteen
systems of interest, twelve of which
1,6,40
promise fundamental worth in terms of
elemental resource, but no signs of
life or habitation. The searches are
not yet conclusive, but at this early
juncture might I be so bold as to
suggest that this region need not
concern the expedition. Subject to
certification, these systems should
be  added to the manifest of the
colonial pioneers who follow in our
footsteps.’ He waved the wand
again, and a different group of stars
lit up. ‘This second region,
estimated as… Master?’ Boas
Comnenus cleared his throat and
obligingly said, ‘Nine weeks,
standard travel time to spinward of
us, equerry.’ ‘Nine weeks to
1,6,41
spinward, thank you,’ Maloghurst
replied. ‘We have barely begun to
scout this district, but there are
early indications that some
significant culture or cultures, of
interstellar capability, exist within
its bounds.’ ‘Currently
functioning?’ Abaddon asked. Too
often, Imperial expeditions came upon
the dry traces of long perished
societies in the desert of stars.
‘Too early to tell, first
captain,’ Maloghurst said.
‘Though the scouts report some
discovered relics bear similarities
to those we found on seven
ninetythree one-five half a decade
ago.’ ‘So, not human?’ Adept
1,6,42
Regulus asked. ‘Too early to tell,
sir,’ Maloghurst repeated. ‘The
region has an itemisation code, but I
believe you’ll all be interested to
hear that it bears an Old Terran
name. Sagittarius.’ ‘The Dreadful
Sagittary,’ Horus whispered, with a
delighted grin. ‘Quite so, my lord.
The region certainly requires further
examination.’ The crippled equerry
moved the wand again, and brought up
a third coil of suns. ‘Our third
option, further to spinward.’
‘Eighteen weeks, standard,’ Boas
Comnenus supplied before he had to be
asked. ‘Thank you, Master. Our
scouts have yet to examine it, but we
have received word from the 140th
1,6,43
Expedition, commanded by Khitas Frome
of the Blood Angels, that opposition
to Imperial advance has been
encountered there. Reports are
patchy, but war has broken out.’
‘Human resistance?’ Varvaras
asked. ‘Are we talking about lost
colonies?’ ‘Xenos, sir,’
Maloghurst said, succinctly. ‘Alien
foes, of some capacity. I have sent a
missive to the 140th asking if they
require our support at this time. It
is significantly smaller than ours.
No reply has yet been received. We
may consider it a priority to venture
forward to this region to reinforce
the Imperial presence there.’ For
the first time since the briefing
1,6,44
began, the smile had left the
Warmaster’s face. ‘I will speak
with my brother Sanguinius on this
matter,’  he said. ‘I would not
see his men perish, unsupported.’
He looked at Maloghurst. ‘Thank you
for this, equerry. We appreciate your
efforts, and the brevity of your
summation.’ There was a ripple of
applause. ‘One last thing, my
lord,’ Maloghurst said. ‘A
personal matter I wish to clear up. I
have become known, so I understand,
as Maloghurst the Twisted, for
reasons of… character that I know
are not lost on any present. I have
always rejoiced in the title, though
some of you might think that odd. I
1,6,45
relish the arts politic, and make no
effort to hide that. Some of my
aides, as I have learned, have made
efforts to have the soubriquet
quashed, believing it offends my
altered state. They worry that I
might find it cruel. A slur. I want
all here assembled to know that I do
not. My body is broken, but my mind
is not. I would take offence if the
name was to be dropped out of
politeness. I don’t value sympathy
much, and I don’t want pity. I am
twisted in body now, but I am still
complex in mind. Don’t think you
are somehow sparing my feelings. I
wish to be known as I always was.’
‘Well said,’ Abaddon cried, and
1,6,46
smacked his palms together. The
assembly rose in a tumult as brisk as
the one that had ushered Maloghurst
on to the stage. The equerry picked
up his staff from the dais and,
leaning upon it, turned to the
Warmaster. Horus raised both hands to
restore quiet. ‘Our thanks to
Maloghurst for presenting these
options to us. There is much to
consider. I dissolve this briefing
now, but I request policy suggestions
and remarks to my attention in the
next day, ship-time. I urge you to
study all possibilities and present
your assessments. We will reconvene
the day after tomorrow at this time.
That is all.’ The meeting broke up.
1,6,47
As the upper galleries emptied,
buzzing with chatter, the parties on
the strategium deck gathered in
informal conference. The Warmaster
stood in quiet conversation with
Maloghurst and the Mechanicum Adept.
‘Nicely done,’ Torgaddon
whispered to Loken. Loken breathed
out. He hadn’t realised what a
weight of tension had built up in him
since his summons to the briefing had
arrived. ‘Yes, finely put,’ said
Aximand. ‘I approve your
commentary, Garviel.’ ‘I just
said what I felt. I made it up as I
went along,’ Loken admitted.
Aximand frowned at him as if not sure
whether he was joking or not.  ‘Are
1,6,48
you not cowed by these circumstances,
Horus?’ Loken asked. ‘At first, I
suppose I must have been,’ Aximand
replied in an off-hand way. ‘You
get used to it, once you’ve been
through one or two. I found it was
helpful to look at his feet.’
‘His feet?’ ‘The Warmaster’s
feet. Catch his eye and you’ll
quite forget what you were going to
say.’ Aximand smiled slightly. It
was the first hint of any softening
towards Loken that Little Horus had
shown. ‘Thanks. I’ll remember
that.’ Abaddon joined them under
the shadow of the overhang. ‘I knew
we’d picked right,’ he said,
clasping Loken’s hand in his own.
1,6,49
‘Cut to the quick, that’s what
the Warmaster wants of us. A clean
appraisal. Good job, Garviel. Now
just make sure it’s a good job.’
‘I will.’ ‘Need any help? I can
lend you the Justaerin if you need
them.’ ‘Thank you, but Tenth can
do this.’ Abaddon nodded. ‘I’ll
tell Falkus his widowmakers are
superfluous to requirements.’
‘Please don’t do that,’ Loken
snapped, alarmed at the prospect of
insulting Falkus Kibre, Captain of
First Company’s Terminator elite.
The other three quarters of the
Mournival laughed out loud. ‘Your
face,’ said Torgaddon. ‘Ezekyle
goads you so easily,’ chuckled
1,6,50
Aximand. ‘Ezekyle knows he will
develop a tough skin, soon enough,’
Abaddon remarked. ‘Captain
Loken?’ Lord Governor Elect Rakris
was approaching them. Abaddon,
Aximand and Torgaddon stood aside to
let him through. ‘Captain Loken,’
Rakris said, ‘I just wanted to say,
sir, I just wanted to say how
grateful I was. To take this matter
upon yourself and your company. To
speak out so very directly. Lord
Varvaras’s soldiers are trying
their best, but they are just men.
The regime here is doomed unless firm
action is taken.’ ‘Tenth Company
will deal with the problem, lord
governor,’ Loken said. ‘You have
1,6,51
my word as an Astartes.’ ‘Because
the army can’t hack it?’ They
looked around and found that the
tall, princely figure of Lord
Commander Varvaras had joined them
too. ‘I-I didn’t mean to
suggest…’ Rakris blithered.
‘No offence was intended, lord
commander,’ said Loken. ‘And none
taken,’ Varvaras said, extending a
hand towards Loken. ‘An old custom
of Terra, Captain Loken…’ Loken
took his hand and shook it. ‘One I
have been reminded of lately,’ he
said. Varvaras smiled. ‘I wanted to
welcome you into our inner circle,
captain. And to assure you that you
did not speak out of turn today. In
1,6,52
the south, my men are being
slaughtered. Day in, day out. I have,
I believe, the finest army in all of
the expeditions, but I know full well
it is composed of men, and just men.
I understand when a fighting man is
needed and when an Astartes is
needed. This is the latter time. Come
to my war cabinet, at your
convenience, and I’ll be happy to
brief you fully.’ ‘Thank you,
lord commander. I will attend you
this afternoon.’ Varvaras nodded.
‘Excuse me, lord commander,’
Torgaddon said. ‘The Mournival is
needed. The Warmaster is withdrawing
and he has called for us.’ The
Mournival followed the Warmaster
1,6,53
through the plated glass doors into
his private sanctum, a wide, well-
appointed chamber built below the
well of the audience galleries on the
port side of the flagship. One wall
was glass, open to the stars.
Maloghurst and the Warmaster bustled
in ahead of them, and the Mournival
drew back into the shadows, waiting
to be called upon. Loken stiffened as
three figures descended the ironwork
screw stair into the room from the
gallery above. The first two were
Astartes of the Imperial Fists,
almost glowing in their yellow plate.
The third was much larger. Another
god. Rogal Dorn, primarch of the
Imperial Fists, brother to Horus.
1,6,54
Dorn greeted the Warmaster warmly,
and went to sit with him and
Maloghurst upon the black leather
couches facing the glass wall.
Servitors brought them refreshments.
Rogal Dorn was a being as great in
all measure as Horus. He, and his
entourage of Imperial Fists, had been
travelling with the expedition for
some months, though they were
expected to take their leave soon.
Other duties and expeditions called.
Loken had been told that Primarch
Dorn had come to them at Horus’s
behest, so that the two of them might
discuss in detail the  obligations
and remit of the role of Warmaster.
Horus had solicited the opinions and
1,6,55
advice of all his brother primarchs
on the subject since the honour had
been bestowed upon him. Being named
Warmaster set him abruptly apart from
them, and raised him up above his
brothers, and there had been some
stifled objections and discontent,
especially from those primarchs who
felt the title should have been
theirs. The primarchs were as prone
to sibling rivalry and petty
competition as any group of brothers.
Guided, it was likely, by
Maloghurst’s shrewd hand, Horus had
courted his brothers, stilling fears,
calming doubts, reaffirming pacts and
generally securing their cooperation.
He wanted none to feel slighted, or
1,6,56
overlooked. He wanted none to think
they were no longer listened to.
Some, like Sanguinius, Lorgar and
Fulgrim, had acclaimed Horus’s
election from the outset. Others,
like Angron and Perturabo, had raged
biliously at the new order, and it
had taken masterful diplomacy on the
Warmaster’s part to placate their
choler and jealousy. A few, like Russ
and the Lion, had been cynically
resolved, unsurprised by the turn of
events. But others, like Guilliman,
Khan and Dorn had simply taken it in
their stride, accepting the
Emperor’s decree as the right and
obvious choice. Horus had ever been
the brightest, the first and the
1,6,57
favourite. They did not doubt his
fitness for the role, for none of the
primarchs had ever matched Horus’s
achievements, nor the intimacy of his
bond with the Emperor. It was to
these solid, resolved brothers that
Horus turned in particular for
counsel. Dorn and Guilliman both
embodied the staunchest and most
dedicated Imperial qualities,
commanding their Legion expeditions
with peerless devotion and military
genius. Horus desired their approval
as a young man might seek the
quiescence of older, more
accomplished brothers. Rogal Dorn
possessed perhaps the finest military
mind of all the primarchs. It was as
1,6,58
ordered and disciplined as Roboute
Guilliman’s, as courageous as the
Lion’s, yet still supple enough to
allow for the flex of inspiration,
the flash of battle zeal that had won
the likes of Leman Russ and the Khan
so many victory wreaths. Dorn’s
record in the crusade was second only
to Horus’s, but he was resolute
where Horus was flamboyant, reserved
where Horus was charismatic, and that
was why Horus had been the obvious
choice for Warmaster. In keeping with
his patient, stony character,
Dorn’s Legion had become renowned
for siegecraft and defensive
strategies. The Warmaster had once
joked that where he could storm a
1,6,59
fortress like no other, Rogal Dorn
could hold it. ‘If I ever laid
assault to a bastion possessed by
you,’ Horus had quipped at a recent
banquet, ‘then the war would last
for all eternity, the best in attack
matched by the best in defence.’
The Imperial Fists were an immovable
object to the Luna Wolves’
unstoppable force. Dorn had been a
quiet, observing presence in his
months with the 63rd Expedition. He
had spent hours in close conference
with the Warmaster, but Loken had
seen him from time to time, watching
drills and studying preparations for
war. Loken had not yet spoken to him,
or met him directly. This was the
1,6,60
smallest place they had both been in
at the same time. He regarded him
now, in calm discussion with the
Warmaster; two mythical beings
manifest in one room. Loken felt it
an honour just to be in their
presence, to see them talk, like men,
in unguarded fashion. Maloghurst
seemed a tiny form beside them.
Primarch Dorn wore a case of armour
that was burnished and ornate like a
tomb chest, dark red and copper-gold
compared to Horus’s white dazzle.
Unfurled eagle wings, fashioned in
metal, haloed his head and decorated
his chest and shoulder plate, and
aquilas and graven laurels embossed
the armour sections of his limbs. A
1,6,61
mantle of red velvet hung around his
broad shoulders, trimmed in golden
weave. His lean face was stern and
unsmiling, even when the Warmaster
raised a joke, and his hair was a
shock of white, bleached like dead
bones. The two Astartes who had
escorted him down from the gallery
came over to wait with the Mournival.
They were well known to Abaddon,
Torgaddon and Aximand, but Loken had
only yet seen them indirectly about
the flagship. Abaddon introduced them
as Sigismund, First Captain of the
Imperial Fists, resplendent in black
and white heraldry, and Efried,
Captain of the Third Company. The
Astartes made the sign of the aquila
1,6,62
to one another in formal greeting.
‘I approve of your direction,’
Sigismund told Loken at once.
‘I’m gratified. You were watching
from the galleries?’ Sigismund
nodded. ‘Prosecute the foe. Get it
over with. Get on. There is still so
much to be done, we cannot afford
delays or time wasting.’ ‘There
are so many worlds still to be
brought to compliance,’ Loken
agreed. ‘One day, we will rest at
last.’ ‘No,’ Sigismund replied
bluntly. ‘The crusade will never
end. Don’t you know that?’  Loken
shook his head, ‘I wouldn’t–’
‘Not ever,’ said Sigismund
emphatically. ‘The more we spread,
1,6,63
the more we find. World after world.
New worlds to conquer. Space is
limitless, and so is our appetite to
master it.’ ‘I disagree,’ Loken
said. ‘War will end, one day. A
rule of peace will be established.
That is the very purpose of our
efforts.’ Sigismund grinned. ‘Is
it? Perhaps. I believe that we have
set ourselves an unending task. The
nature of mankind makes it so. There
will always be another goal, another
prospect.’ ‘Surely, brother, you
can conceive of a time when all
worlds have been brought into one
unity of Imperial rule. Isn’t that
the dream we strive to realise?’
Sigismund stared into Loken’s face.
1,6,64
‘Brother Loken, I have heard much
about you, all of it good. I had not
imagined I would discover such
naivety in you. We will spend our
lives fighting to secure this
Imperium, and then I fear we will
spend the rest of our days fighting
to keep it intact. There is such
involving darkness amongst the stars.
Even when the Imperium is complete,
there will be no peace. We will be
obliged to fight on to preserve what
we have fought to establish. Peace is
a vain wish. Our crusade may one day
adopt another name, but it will never
truly end. In the far future, there
will be only war.’ ‘I think
you’re wrong,’ Loken said. ‘How
1,6,65
innocent you are,’ Sigismund
mocked, ‘and I thought the Luna
Wolves were supposed to be the most
aggressive of us all. That’s how
you like the other Legions to think
of you, isn’t it? The most feared
of mankind’s warrior classes?’
‘Our reputation speaks for itself,
sir,’ said Loken. ‘As does the
reputation of the Imperial Fists,’
Sigismund replied. ‘Are we going to
scrap about it now? Argue which
Legion is toughest?’ ‘The answer,
always, is the Wolves of Fenris,’
Torgaddon put in, ‘because they are
clinically insane.’ He grinned
broadly, sensing the tension, and
wishing to dispel it. ‘If you’re
1,6,66
comparing sane Legions, of course,
the question becomes more complex.
Primarch Roboute’s Ultramarines
make a good show, but then there are
so bloody many of them. The Word
Bearers, the White Scars, the
Imperial Fists, oh, all have fine
records. But the Luna Wolves, ah me,
the Luna Wolves. Sigismund, in a
straight fight? Do you  really think
you’d have a hope? Honestly? Your
yellow ragamuffins against the best
of the best?’ Sigismund laughed.
‘Whatever helps you sleep, Tarik.
Terra bless us all it is a paradigm
that will never be tested.’ ‘What
brother Sigismund isn’t telling
you, Garviel,’ Torgaddon said,
1,6,67
‘is that his Legion is going to
miss all the glory. It’s to be
withdrawn. He’s quite miffed about
it.’ ‘Tarik is being selective
with the truth,’ Sigismund snorted.
‘The Imperial Fists have been
commanded by the Emperor to return to
Terra and establish a guard around
him there. We are chosen as his
Praetorians. Now who’s miffed, Luna
Wolf?’ ‘Not I,’ said Torgaddon.
‘I’ll be winning laurels in war
while you grow fat and lazy minding
the home fires.’ ‘You’re
quitting the crusade?’ Loken asked.
‘I had heard something of this.’
‘The Emperor wishes us to fortify
the Palace of Terra and guard its
1,6,68
bulwarks. This was his word at the
Ullanor Triumph. We have been the
best part of two years tying up our
business so we might comply with his
desires. Yes, we’re going home to
Terra. Yes, we will sit out the rest
of the crusade. Except that I believe
there will be plenty of crusade left
once we have been given leave to quit
Earth, our duty done. You won’t
finish this, Luna Wolves. The stars
will have long forgotten your name
when the Imperial Fists war abroad
again.’ Torgaddon placed his hand
on the hilt of his chainsword,
playfully. ‘Are you so keen to be
slapped down by me for your
insolence, Sigismund?’ ‘I don’t
1,6,69
know. Is he?’ Rogal Dorn suddenly
towered behind them. ‘Does
Sigismund deserve a slap, Captain
Torgaddon? Probably. In the spirit of
comrade-ship, let him be. He bruises
easily.’ All of them laughed at the
primarch’s words. The barest hint
of a smile flickered across Rogal
Dorn’s lips. ‘Loken,’ he said,
gesturing. Loken followed the massive
primarch to the far corner of the
chamber. Behind them, Sigismund and
Efried continued to sport with the
others of the Mournival, and
elsewhere Horus sat in intense
conference with Maloghurst. ‘We are
charged to return to the
homeworld,’ Dorn said,
1,6,70
conversationally.  His voice was low
and astonishingly soft, like the lap
of water on a distant beach, but
there was a strength running through
it, like the tension of a steel
cable. ‘The Emperor has asked us to
fortify the Imperial stronghold, and
who am I to question the Emperor’s
needs? I am glad he recognises the
particular talents of the VII
Legion.’ Dorn looked down at Loken.
‘You’re not used to the likes of
me, are you, Loken?’ ‘No,
lord.’ ‘I like that about you.
Ezekyle and Tarik, men like them have
been so long in the company of your
lord, they think nothing of it. You,
however, understand that a primarch
1,6,71
is not like a man, or even an
Astartes. I’m not talking about
strength. I’m talking about the
weight of responsibilty.’ ‘Yes,
lord.’ Dorn sighed. ‘The Emperor
has no like, Loken. There are no gods
in this hollow universe to keep him
company. So he made us, demi-gods, to
stand beside him. I have never quite
come to terms with my status. Does
that surprise you? I see what I am
capable of, and what is expected of
me, and I shudder. The mere fact of
me frightens me sometimes. Do you
think your lord Horus ever feels that
way?’ ‘I do not, lord,’ Loken
said. ‘Self-confidence is one of
his keenest qualities.’ ‘I think
1,6,72
so too, and I am glad of it. There
could be no better Warmaster than
Horus, but a man, even a primarch, is
only as good as the counsel he
receives, especially if he is utterly
self-confident. He must be tempered
and guided by those close to him.’
‘You speak of the Mournival,
sir.’ Rogal Dorn nodded. He gazed
out through the armoured glass wall
at the scintillating expanse of the
starfield. ‘You know that I’ve
had my eye on you? That I spoke in
support of your election?’ ‘I
have been told so, lord. It baffles
and flatters me.’ ‘My brother
Horus needs an honest voice in his
ear. A voice that appreciates the
1,6,73
scale and import of our undertaking.
A voice that is not blasé in the
company of demi-gods. Sigismund and
Efried do this for me. They keep me
honest. You should do the same for
your lord.‘ ‘I will endeavour
to–’ Loken began. ‘They wanted
Luc Sedirae or Iacton Qruze. Did you
know that? Both  names were
considered. Sedirae is a battle-
hungry killer, so much like Abaddon.
He would say yes to anything, if it
meant war-glory. Qruze – you call
him the “Half-heard” I’m
told?’ ‘We do, lord.’ ‘Qruze
is a sycophant. He would say yes to
anything if it meant he stayed in
favour. The Mournival needs a proper,
1,6,74
dissenting opinion.’ ‘A
naysmith,’ Loken said. Dorn flashed
a real smile. ‘Yes, just so, like
the old dynasts did! A naysmith. Your
schooling’s good. My brother Horus
needs a voice of reason in his ear,
if he is to rein in his eagerness and
act in the Emperor’s stead. Our
other brothers, some of them quite
demented by the choice of Horus, need
to see he is firmly in control. So I
vouched for you, Garviel Loken. I
examined your record and your
character, and thought you would be
the right mix in the alloy of the
Mournival. Don’t be insulted, but
there is something very human about
you, Loken, for an Astartes.’ ‘I
1,6,75
fear, my lord, that my helm will no
longer fit me, you have swelled my
head so with your compliments.’
Dorn nodded. ‘My apologies.’
‘You spoke of responsibility. I
feel that weight suddenly,
terribly.’ ‘You’re strong,
Loken. Astartes-built. Endure it.’
‘I will, lord.’ Dorn turned from
the armoured port and looked down at
Loken. He placed his great hands
gently on Loken’s shoulders. ‘Be
yourself. Just be yourself. Speak
your mind plainly, for you have been
granted the rare opportunity to do
so. I can return to Terra confident
that the crusade is in safe hands.’
‘I wonder if your faith in me is
1,6,76
too much, lord,’ Loken said. ‘As
fervent as Sedirae, I have just
proposed a war–’ ‘I heard you
speak. You made the case well. That
is all part of your role now.
Sometimes you must advise. Sometimes
you must allow the Warmaster to use
you.’ ‘Use me?’ ‘You
understand what Horus had you do this
morning?’ ‘Lord?’ ‘He had
primed the Mournival to back him,
Loken. He is cultivating the air of a
peacemaker, for that plays well
across the worlds of the Imperium.
This morning, he wanted someone other
than himself to suggest unleashing
the  Legions for war.’  
1,6,77
SEVEN
 Oaths
of moment Keeler takes a pict Scare
tactics ‘Stay close, please,’ the
iterator said. ‘No one wander away
from the group, and no one make any
record beyond written notes without
prior permission. Is that clear?’
They all answered yes. ‘We have
been granted ten minutes, and that
limit will be strictly observed. This
is a real privilege.’ The iterator,
a sallow man in his thirties called
Emont, who despite his appearance
possessed what Euphrati Keeler
thought was a most beautiful speaking
voice, paused and offered one last
piece of advice to the group. ‘This
1,7,1
is also a hazardous place. A place of
war. Watch your step, and be aware of
where you are.’ He turned and led
them down the concourse to the
massive blast hatch. The rattle of
machine tools echoed out to them.
This was an area of the ship the
remembrancers had never previously
been allowed to visit. Most of the
martial areas were off limits except
by strict permission, but the
embarkation deck was utterly
forbidden at all times. There were
six of them in the group. Keeler,
another imagist called Siman Sark, a
painter called Fransisko Twell, a
composer of symphonic patterns called
Tolemew Van Krasten, and two
1,7,2
documentarists called Avrius Carnis
and Borodin Flora. Carnis and Flora
were already bickering quietly about
‘themes and approaches’. All of
the remembrancers wore durable
clothing appropriate for bad
weather, and all carried kit bags.
Keeler was fairly sure they’d all
prepared in vain. The permission they
hoped for would not be issued. They
were lucky to get this far. She
looped her own kit bag over her
shoulder, and settled her favourite
picter unit around her neck on its
strap. At the head of the party,
Emont came to a halt before the two
fully armoured Luna Wolves standing
watch at the hatch, and showed them
1,7,3
the group’s credentials.
‘Approved by the equerry,’ she
heard him say. In his beige robes,
Emont was a fragile figure compared
to the two armoured giants. He had to
lift his head to look up at them. The
Astartes studied the paperwork, made
comments to one another in brief
clicks of inter-suit vox, and then
nodded them through. The embarkation
deck – and Keeler had to remind
herself that this was just
oneembarkation deck, for the flagship
possessed six – was an immense
space, a long, echoing tunnel
dominated by the launch ramps and
delivery trackways running its
length. At the far end, half a
1,7,4
kilometre away, open space was
visible through the shimmer of
integrity fields. The noise was
punishing. Motorised tools hammered
and ratcheted, hoists whined, loading
units trundled and rattled, hatches
slammed, and reactive engines whooped
and flared as they were tested. There
was activity everywhere: deck crews
hurrying into position, fitters and
artificers making final checks and
adjustments, servitors unlocking fuel
lines. Munition carts hummed past in
long sausage-chains. The air stank of
heat, oil and exhaust fumes. Six
Stormbirds sat on launch carriages
before them. Heavy, armoured delivery
vehicles, they were void capable, but
1,7,5
also honed and sleek for atmospheric
work. They sat in two rows of three,
wings extended, like hawks waiting to
be thrown to the lure. They were
painted white, and showed the
wolf’s head icon and the eye of
Horus on their hulls. ‘…known as
Stormbirds,’ the iterator was
saying as he walked them forward.
‘The actual pattern type is Warhawk
VI. Most expedition forces are now
reliant on the smaller, standard
construct Thunderhawk pattern,
examples of which you can see under
covers to our left in the hardstand
area, but the Legion has made an
effort to keep these old, heavy-duty
machines in service. They have been
1,7,6
delivering the Luna Wolves into war
since the start of the Great Crusade,
since before that, actually. They
were manufactured on Terra by the
Yndonesic Bloc for use against the
Panpacific tribes during the
Unification Wars. A dozen will be
employed in this venture today. Six
from this deck, six from Aft
Embarkation 2.’ Keeler raised her
picter and took several quick shots
of the line of Stormbirds ahead. For
the last, she crouched down to get a
low, impressive angle down the row of
their flared wings. ‘I said no
records!’ Emont snapped, hurrying
to her. ‘I didn’t think for a
moment you were serious,’ Keeler
1,7,7
responded smoothly. ‘We’ve got
ten minutes. I’m an imagist. What
the hell did you think I was going to
do?’ Emont looked flustered. He was
about to say something when he
noticed that Carnis and Flora were
wandering astray, locked in some
petty squabble. ‘Stay with the
group!’ Emont cried out, hurrying
to shepherd them back. ‘Get
anything good?’ Sark asked Keeler.
‘Please , it’s me,’ she
replied. He laughed, and took out a
picter of his own from his rucksack.
‘I didn’t have the balls, but
you’re right. What the hell are we
doing here if not our job?’ He took
a few shots. Keeler liked Sark. He
1,7,8
was good company and had a decent
track record of work on Terra. She
doubted he would get much here. His
eye for composition was fine when it
came to faces, but this was very much
her thing. Both the documentarists
had now cornered Emont and were
grilling him with questions that he
struggled to answer. Keeler wondered
where Mersadie Oliton had got to.
Competition amongst the remembrancers
for these six places had been fierce,
and Mersadie had won a slot thanks to
Keeler’s good word and, it was
said, approval from someone high up
in the Legion, but she had failed to
show up on time that morning, and her
place had been taken at the last
1,7,9
minute by Borodin Flora. Ignoring the
iterator’s instructions, she moved
away from the group, and chased
images with her picter. The Luna Wolf
emblem stencilled on an erect braking
flap; two servitors glistening with
lubricant as they struggled to fix a
faulty feed; deck crew panting and
wiping sweat from their brows beside
a munition trolley they had just
loaded; the bare-metal snout of an
underwing cannon. ‘Are you trying
to get me replaced?’ Emont asked,
catching up with her. ‘No.’  ‘I
really must ask you to keep in line,
madam,’ he said. ‘I know you’re
in favour, but there is a limit.
After that business on the
1,7,10
surface…’ ‘What business?’
she asked. ‘A couple of days ago,
surely you heard?’ ‘No.’
‘Some remembrancer gave his minders
the slip during a surface visit and
got into a deal of trouble. Quite a
scandal. It’s annoyed the higher-
ups. The Primary Iterator had to
wrangle hard to prevent the
remembrancer contingent being
suspended from activity.’ ‘Was it
that bad?’ ‘I don’t know the
details. Please, for me, stay in
line.’ ‘You have a very lovely
voice,’ Keeler said. ‘You could
ask me to do anything. Of course I
will.’ Emont blushed. ‘Let’s
continue with the visit.’ As he
1,7,11
turned, she took another pict,
capturing the scruffy iterator, head
down, against a backdrop of bustling
crewmen and threatening ships.
‘Iterator?’ she called. ‘Have
we been granted permission to
accompany the drop?’ ‘I don’t
believe so,’ he said sadly.
‘I’m sorry. I’ve not been
told.’ A fanfare boomed out across
the vast deck. Keeler heard – and
felt – a beat like a heavy drum,
like a warhammer striking again and
again against metal. ‘Come to one
side. Now! To one side!’ Emont
called, trying to gather the group on
the edge of the deck space. The
drumming grew closer and louder. It
1,7,12
was feet. Steel-shod feet marching
across decking. Three hundred
Astartes, in full armour and marching
perfectly in step, advanced onto the
embarkation deck between the waiting
Stormbirds. At the front of them, a
standard bearer carried the great
banner of the Tenth Company. Keeler
gasped at the sight of them. So many,
so perfect, so huge, so regimented.
She raised her picter with trembling
hands and began to shoot. Giants in
white metal, assembling for war,
uniform and identical, precise and
composed. Orders flew out, and the
Astartes came to a halt with a
crashing din of heels. They became
statues, as equerries hurried through
1,7,13
their files, directing and assigning
men to their carriers.  Smoothly,
units began to turn in fluid
sequence, and filed onto the waiting
vessels. ‘They will have already
taken their oaths of moment,’ Emont
was saying to the group in a hushed
whisper. ‘Explain,’ Van Krasten
requested. Emont nodded. ‘Every
soldier of the Imperium is sworn to
uphold his loyalty to the Emperor at
the start of his commission, and the
Astartes are no exception. No one
doubts their continued devotion to
the pledge, but before individual
missions, the Astartes choose to
swear an immediate oath, an “oath
of moment”, that binds them
1,7,14
specifically to the matter at hand.
They pledge to uphold the particular
concerns of the enterprise before
them. You may think of it as a
reaffirmation, I suppose. It is a
ritual re-pledging. The Astartes do
love their rituals.’ ‘I don’t
understand,’ said Van Krasten.
‘They are already sworn but–’
‘To uphold the truth of the
Imperium and the light of the
Emperor,’ Emont said, ‘but, as
the name suggests, an oath of moment
applies to an individual action. It
is specific and precise.’ Van
Krasten nodded. ‘Who’s that?’
Twell asked, pointing. A senior
Astartes, a captain by his cloak, was
1,7,15
walking the lines of warriors as they
streamed neatly onto the drop-ships.
‘That’s Loken,’ Emont said.
Keeler raised her picter. Loken’s
comb-crested helm was off. His fair,
cropped hair framed his pale,
freckled face. His grey eyes seemed
immense. Mersadie had spoken to her
of Loken. Quite a force now, if the
rumours were true. One of the four.
She shot him speaking to a
subordinate, and again, waving
servitors clear of a landing ramp. He
was the most extraordinary subject.
She didn’t have to compose around
him, or shoot to crop later. He
dominated every frame. No wonder
Mersadie was so taken with him.
1,7,16
Keeler wondered again why Mersadie
Oliton had missed this chance. Now
Loken turned away, his men all but
boarded. He spoke with the standard
bearer, and touched the hem of the
banner with affection. Another fine
shot. Then he swung round to face
five armoured figures approaching
across the suddenly empty deck.
‘This is…’ Emont whispered.
‘This is quite something. I hope
you all  understand you’re lucky to
see this.’ ‘See what?’ asked
Sark. ‘The captain takes his oath
of moment last of all. It will be
heard and sworn to by two of his
fellow captains, but, oh my goodness,
the rest of the Mournival have come
1,7,17
to hear him pledge.’ ‘That’s
the Mournival?’ Keeler asked, her
picter shooting. ‘First Captain
Abaddon, Captain Torgaddon, Captain
Aximand, and with them Captains
Sedirae and Targost,’ Emont
breathed, afraid of raising his
voice. ‘Which one is Abaddon?’
Keeler asked, aiming her picter.
Loken knelt. ‘There was no
need–’ he began. ‘We wanted to
do this right,’ Torgaddon replied.
‘Luc?’ Luc Sedirae, Captain of
the Thirteenth Company, took out the
seal paper on which the oath of
moment was written. ‘I am sent to
hear you,’ he said. ‘And I am
here to witness it,’ Targost said.
1,7,18
‘And we are here to keep you
cheerful,’ Torgaddon added. Abaddon
and Little Horus chuckled. Neither
Targost nor Sedirae were Sons of
Horus. Targost, Captain of the
Seventh, was a blunt-faced man with a
deep scar across his brow. Luc
Sedirae, champion of so many wars,
was a smiling rogue, blond and
handsome, his eyes blue and bright,
his mouth permanently half-open as if
about to bite something. Sedirae
raised the scrap of parchment. ‘Do
you, Garviel Loken, accept your role
in this? Do you promise to lead your
men into the zone of war, and conduct
them to glory, no matter the ferocity
or ingenuity of the foe? Do you swear
1,7,19
to crush the insurgents of Sixty-
Three Nineteen, despite all they
might throw at you? Do you pledge to
do honour to the XVI Legion and the
Emperor?’ Loken placed his hand on
the bolter Targost held out. ‘On
this matter and by this weapon, I
swear.’ Sedirae nodded and handed
the oath paper to Loken. ‘Kill for
the living, brother,’ he said,
‘and kill for the dead.’ He
turned to walk away. Targost
holstered his bolter, made the sign
of the aquila, and followed him.
Loken rose to his feet, securing his
oath paper to the rim of his right
shoulderguard. ‘Do this right,
Garviel,’ Abaddon said. ‘I’m
1,7,20
glad you told me that,’ Loken dead-
panned. ‘I’d been considering
making a mess of it.’ Abaddon
hesitated, wrong-footed. Torgaddon
and Aximand laughed. ‘He’s
growing that thick skin already,
Ezekyle,’ Aximand sniggered. ‘You
walked into that,’ Torgaddon added.
‘I know, I know,’ Abaddon
snapped. He glared at Loken.
‘Don’t let the commander down.’
‘Would I?’ Loken replied, and
walked away to his Stormbird. ‘Our
time’s up,’ Emont said. Keeler
didn’t care. That last pict had
been exceptional. The Mournival,
Sedirae and Targost, all in a solemn
group, Loken on his knees. Emont
1,7,21
conducted the remembrancers out of
the embarkation deck space to an
observation deck, adjacent to the
launch port from which they could
watch the Stormbirds deploy. They
could hear the rising note of the
Stormbird engines behind them,
trembling the embarkation deck as
they fired up in prelaunch test. The
roaring dulled away as they walked
down the long access tunnel, hatches
closing one by one after them. The
observation deck was a long chamber,
one side of which was a frame of
armoured glass. The deck’s internal
lighting had been switched low so
that they could better see into the
darkness outside. It was an
1,7,22
impressive view. They directly
overlooked the yawning maw of the
embarkation deck, a colossal hatch
ringing with winking guide lights.
The bulk of the flagship rose away
above them, like a crenellated Gothic
city. Beyond, lay the void itself.
Small service craft and cargo landers
flitted past, some on local business,
some heading out to other ships of
the expedition fleet. Five of these
could be seen from the observation
deck, sleek monsters at high anchor
several kilometres away. They were
virtual silhouettes, but the distant
sun caught them obliquely, and gave
them hard, golden outlines along
their ribbed upper hulls. Below lay
1,7,23
the world they orbited. Sixty-Three
Nineteen. They were above its
nightside, but there was a smoky grey
crescent of radiance where the
terminator crept forward. In the dark
mass, Keeler could make out the faint
light-glow of cities speckling the
sleeping surface. Impressive though
the view was, she knew shots would be
a waste of time. Between the glass,
the distance and the odd light
sources, resolution would be poor.
She found a seat away from the
others, and began to review the picts
she’d already taken, calling them
up on the picter’s viewscreen.
‘May I see?’ asked a voice. She
looked up and had to peer in the
1,7,24
deck’s gloom to identify the
speaker. It was Sindermann, the
Primary Iterator. ‘Of course,’
she said, rising to her feet and
holding the picter so he could see
the images as she thumbed them up one
by one. He craned his head forward,
curious. ‘You have a wonderful eye,
Mistress Keeler. Oh, that one is
particularly fine! The crew working
so hard. I find it striking because
it is so natural, candid, I suppose.
So very much of our pictorial record
is arch and formally posed.’ ‘I
like to get people when they’re not
aware of me.’ ‘This one is simply
magnificent. You’ve captured
Garviel perfectly there.’ ‘You
1,7,25
know him personally, sir?’ ‘Why
do you ask?’ ‘You called him by
his forename, not by any honorific or
rank.’ Sindermann smiled at her.
‘I think Captain Loken might be
considered a friend of mine. I’d
like to think so, anyway. You never
can tell with an Astartes. They form
relationships with mortals in a
curious way, but we spend time
together and discuss certain
matters.’ ‘You’re his
mentor?’ ‘His tutor. There is a
great difference. I know things he
does not, so I am able to expand his
knowledge, but I do not presume to
have influence over him. Oh, Mistress
Keeler! This one is superb! The best,
1,7,26
I should say.’ ‘I thought so. I
was very pleased with it.’ ‘All
of them together like that, and
Garviel kneeling so humbly, and the
way you’ve framed them against the
company standard.’ ‘That was just
happenstance,’ Keeler said. ‘They
chose what they were standing
beside.’ Sindermann placed his hand
gently upon hers. He seemed genuinely
grateful for the chance to review her
work. ‘That pict alone will become
famous, I have no doubt. It will be
reproduced in history texts for as
long as the Imperium endures.’
‘It’s just a pict,’ she chided.
‘It is a witness. It is a perfect
example of what the remembrancers can
1,7,27
do. I have been reviewing some of the
material produced by the
remembrancers thus far, the material
that’s been added to the
expedition’s collective archive.
Some of it is… patchy, shall I say?
Ideal ammunition for those who claim
the remembrancer project is a waste
of time, funds and ship space, but
some is outstanding, and I would
class your work amongst that.’
‘You’re very kind.’ ‘I am
honest, mistress. And I believe that
if mankind does not properly document
and witness his achievements, then
only half of this undertaking has
been made. Speaking of honest, come
with me.’ He led her back to the
1,7,28
main group by the window. Another
figure had joined them on the
observation deck, and stood talking
to Van Karsten. It was the equerry,
Maloghurst, and he turned as they
approached. ‘Kyril, do you want to
tell them?’ ‘You engineered it,
equerry. The pleasure’s yours.’
Maloghurst nodded. ‘After some
negotiation with the expedition
seniors, it has been agreed that the
six of you can follow the strike
force to the surface and observe the
venture. You will travel down with
one of the ancillary support
vessels.’ The remembrancers
chorused their delight. ‘There’s
been a lot of debate about allowing
1,7,29
remembrancers to become embedded in
the layers of military activity,’
Sindermann said, ‘particularly
concerning the issue of civilian
welfare in a warzone. There is also,
if I may be quite frank, some concern
about what you will see. The Astartes
in war is a shocking, savage sight.
Many believe that such images are not
for public distribution, as they
might paint a negative picture of the
crusade.’ ‘We both believe
otherwise,’ Maloghurst said. ‘The
truth can’t be wrong, even if it is
ugly or shocking. We need to be clear
about what we are doing, and how we
are doing it, and allow persons such
as yourselves to respond to it. That
1,7,30
is the honesty on which a mature
culture must be based. We also need
to celebrate, and how can you
celebrate the courage of the Astartes
if you don’t see it? I believe in
the strength of positive propaganda,
thanks, in no  small part, to
Mistress Keeler here and her
documenting of my own plight. There
is a rallying power in images and
reports of both Imperial victory and
Imperial suffering. It communicates a
common cause to bind and uplift our
society.’ ‘It helps,’
Sindermann put in, ‘that this is a
low-key action. An unusual use of the
Astartes in a policing role. It
should be over in a day or so, with
1,7,31
little collateral risk. However, I
wish to emphasise that this is still
dangerous. You will observe
instruction at all times, and never
stray from your protection detail. I
am to accompany you – this was one
of the stipulations made by the
Warmaster. Listen to me and do as I
say at all times.’ So we’re still
to be vetted and controlled, Keeler
thought. Shown only what they choose
to show us. Never mind, this is still
a great opportunity. One that I
can’t believe Mersadie has missed.
‘Look!’ cried Borodin Flora. They
all turned. The Stormbirds were
launching. Like giant steel darts
they shot from the deck mouth, the
1,7,32
sunlight catching their armoured
flanks. Majestically, they turned in
the darkness as they fell away,
burners lighting up like blue coals
as they dropped in formation towards
the planet. Bracing himself against
the low, overhead handrails, Loken
moved down the spinal aisle of the
lead Stormbird. Luna Wolves,
impassive behind their visors, their
weapons locked and stowed, sat in the
rear-facing cage-seats either side of
him. The bird rocked and shuddered as
it cut its steep path through the
upper atmosphere. He reached the
cockpit section and wrenched open the
hatch to enter. Two flight officers
sat back to back, facing wall panel
1,7,33
consoles, and beyond them two pilot
servitors lay, hardwired into
forward-facing helm positions in the
cone. The cockpit was dark, apart
from the coloured glow of the
instrumentation and the sheen of
light coming in through the forward
slitports. ‘Captain?’ one of the
flight officers said, turning and
looking up. ‘What’s the problem
with the vox?’ Loken asked.
‘I’ve had several reports of comm
faults from the men. Ghosting and
chatter.’ ‘We’re getting that
too, sir,’ the officer said, his
hands playing over his  controls.
‘and I’m hearing similar reports
from the other birds. We think it’s
1,7,34
atmospherics.’ ‘Disruption?’
‘Yes, sir. I’ve checked with the
flagship, and they haven’t picked
up on it. It’s probably an acoustic
echo from the surface.’ ‘It seems
to be getting worse,’ Loken said.
He adjusted his helm and tried his
link again. The static hiss was still
there, but now it had shapes in it,
like muffled words. ‘Is that
language?’ he asked. The officer
shook his head. ‘Can’t tell, sir.
It’s just reading as general
interference. Perhaps we’re
bouncing up broadcasts from one of
the southern cities. Or maybe even
army traffic.’ ‘We need clean
vox,’ Loken said. ‘Do
1,7,35
something.’ The officer shrugged
and adjusted several dials. ‘I can
try purging the signal. I can wash it
through the signal buffers. Maybe
that will tidy up the channels…’
In Loken’s ears, there was a
sudden, seething rush of static, and
then things became quieter suddenly.
‘Better,’ he said. Then he
paused. Now the hiss was gone, he
could hear the voice. It was tiny,
distant, impossibly quiet, but it was
speaking proper words. ‘…only
name you’ll hear….’ ‘What is
that?’ Loken asked. He strained to
hear. The voice was so very far away,
like a rustle of silk. The flight
officer craned his neck, listening to
1,7,36
his own headphones. He made minute
adjustments to his dials. ‘I might
be able to…’ he began. A touch of
his hand had suddenly cleaned the
signal to audibility. ‘What in the
name of Terra is that?’ he asked.
Loken listened. The voice, like a
gust of dry, desert wind, said,
‘Samus. That’s the only name
you’ll hear. Samus. It means the
end and the death. Samus. I am Samus.
Samus is all around you. Samus is the
man beside you. Samus will gnaw upon
your bones. Look out! Samus is
here.’ The voice faded. The channel
went dead and quiet, except for the
occasional echo pop. The flight
officer took off his headset and
1,7,37
looked at Loken. His face was wide-
eyed and fearful. Loken recoiled
slightly. He wasn’t made to deal
with  fear. The concept disgusted
him. ‘I d-don’t know what that
was,’ the flight officer said. ‘I
do,’ said Loken. ‘Our enemy is
trying to scare us.’  
1,7,38
EIGHT
 One-way
war Sindermann in grass and sand
Jubal Following the ‘Emperor’s’
death and the fall of their ancient,
centralised government, the
insurgents had fled into the mountain
massifs of the southern hemisphere,
and occupied a fastness in a range of
peaks, called the Whisperheads in the
local language. The air was thin, for
the altitude was very great. Dawn was
coming up, and the mountains loomed
as stern, misty steeples of pale
green ice that reflected sun glare.
The Stormbirds dropped from the edge
of space, out of the sky’s dark
blue mantle, trailing golden fire
1,8,1
from their ablative surfaces. In the
frugal habitations and villages in
the foothills, the townsfolk, born
into a culture of myth and
superstition, saw the fiery marks in
the dawn sky as an omen. Many fell to
wailing and lamenting, or hurried to
their village fanes. The religious
faith of Sixty-Three Nineteen, strong
in the capital and the major cities,
was distilled here into a more potent
brew. These were impoverished
backwaters, where the anachronistic
beliefs of the society were
heightened by a subsistence lifestyle
and poor education. The Imperial army
had already struggled to contain this
primitive zealotry during its
1,8,2
occupation. As the streaks of fire
crossed the sky, they found
themselves hard-pressed to control
the mounting agitation in the
villages. The Stormbirds set down,
engines screaming, on a plateau of
dry, white lava-rock five thousand
metres below the caps of the highest
peaks where the rebel fastness lay.
They whirled up clouds of pumice grit
from their jets as they crunched in.
The sky was white, and the peaks were
white against them, and white cloud
softened the air. A series of
precipitous rifts and ice canyons
dropped away behind the plateau,
wreathed in smoke-cloud, and the
lower peaks gleamed in the rising
1,8,3
light. Tenth Company clattered out
into the sparse, chilly air, weapons
ready. They came to martial order,
and disembarked as smoothly as Loken
could have wished. But the vox was
still disturbed. Every few minutes,
‘Samus’ chattered again, like a
sigh upon the mountain wind. Loken
called the senior squad leaders to
him as soon as he had landed: Vipus
of Locasta, Jubal of Hellebore,
Rassek of the Terminator squad,
Talonus of Pithraes, Kairus of
Walkure, and eight more. All grouped
around, showing deference to Xavyer
Jubal. Loken, who had always read men
well as a commander, needed none of
his honed leadership skills to
1,8,4
realise that Jubal wasn’t wearing
Vipus’s elevation well. As the
others of the Mournival had advised
him, Loken had followed his gut and
appointed Nero Vipus his proxy-
commander, to serve when matters of
state drew Loken apart from Tenth.
Vipus was popular, but Jubal, as
sergeant of the first squad, felt
slighted. There was no rule that
stated the sergeant of a company’s
first squad automatically followed in
seniority. The sequencing was simply
a numerical distinction, but there
was a given order to things, and
Jubal felt aggrieved. He had told
Loken so, several times. Loken
remembered Little Horus’s words. If
1,8,5
you trust Vipus, make it Vipus. Never
compromise. Jubal’s a big boy.
He’ll get over it. ‘Let’s do
this, and quickly,’ Loken told his
officers. ‘The Terminators have the
lead here. Rassek?’ ‘My squad is
ready to serve, captain,’ Rassek
replied curtly. Like all the men in
his specialist squad, Sergeant Rassek
wore the titanic armour of a
Terminator, a variant only lately
introduced into the arsenal of the
Astartes. By dint of their primacy,
and the fact that their primarch was
Warmaster, the Luna Wolves had been
amongst the first Legions to benefit
from the issue of Terminator plate.
Some entire Legions still lacked it.
1,8,6
The armour was designed for heavy
assault. Thickly plated and
consequently exaggerated in its
dimensions, a Terminator suit turned
an Astartes warrior into a slow,
cumbersome, but entirely unstoppable
humanoid tank. An Astartes clad in
Terminator plate gave up all his
speed, dexterity, agility and range
of  movement. What he got in return
was the ability to shrug off almost
any ballistic attack. Rassek towered
over them in his armour, dwarfing
them as a primarch dwarfs Astartes,
or an Astartes dwarfs mortal men.
Massive weapons systems were built
into his shoulders, arms and
gauntlets. ‘Lead off to the bridges
1,8,7
and clear the way,’ Loken said. He
paused. Now was a moment for gentle
diplomacy. ‘Jubal, I want Hellebore
to follow the Terminators in as the
weight of the first strike.’ Jubal
nodded, evidently pleased. The scowl
of displeasure he had been wearing
for weeks now lifted for a moment.
All the officers were bareheaded for
this briefing, despite the fact that
the air was unbreathably thin by
human standards. Their enhanced
pulmonary systems didn’t even
labour. Loken saw Nero Vipus smile,
and knew he understood the
significance of this instruction.
Loken was offering Jubal some measure
of glory, to reassure him he was not
1,8,8
forgotten. ‘Let’s go to it!’
Loken cried. ‘Lupercal!’
‘Lupercal!’ the officers
answered. They clamped their helms
into place. Portions of the company
began to move ahead towards the
natural rock bridges and causeways
that linked the plateau to the higher
terrain. Army regiments, swaddled in
heavy coats and rebreathers against
the cold, thin air, had moved up onto
the plateau to meet them from the
town of Kasheri in the lower gorge.
‘Kasheri is at compliance, sir,’
an officer told Loken, his voice
muffled by his mask, his breathing
pained and ragged. ‘The enemy has
withdrawn to the high fortress.’
1,8,9
Loken nodded, gazing up at the bright
crags looming in the white light.
‘We’ll take it from here,’ he
said. ‘They’re well armed,
sir,’ the officer warned. ‘Every
time we’ve pushed to take the rock
bridges, they’ve killed us with
heavy cannon. We don’t think they
have much in the way of numerical
weight, but they have the advantage
of position. It’s a slaughter
ground, sir, and they have the cross-
draw on us. We understand the
insurgents are being led by an
Invisible called Rykus or Ryker.
We–’ ‘We’ll take it from
here,’ Loken repeated. ‘I don’t
need to know the name of the enemy
1,8,10
before I kill him.’ He turned.
‘Jubal. Vipus. Form up and move
ahead!’  ‘Just like that?’ the
army officer asked sourly. ‘Six
weeks we’ve been here, slogging it
out, the body toll like you
wouldn’t believe, and you–’
‘We’re Astartes,’ Loken said.
‘You’re relieved.’ The officer
shook his head with a sad laugh. He
muttered something under his breath.
Loken turned back and took a step
towards the man, causing him to start
in alarm. No man liked to see the
stern eye-slits of a Luna Wolf’s
impassive visor turn to regard him.
‘What did you say?’ Loken asked.
‘I… I… nothing, sir.’ ‘What
1,8,11
did you say?’ ‘I said… “and
the place is haunted”, sir.’
‘If you believe this place is
haunted, my friend,’ Loken said,
‘then you are admitting to a belief
in spirits and daemons.’ ‘I’m
not, sir! I’m really not!’ ‘I
should think not,’ Loken said.
‘We’re not barbarians.’ ‘All
I mean,’ said the soldier
breathlessly, his face flushed and
sweaty behind his breather mask,
‘is that there’s something about
this place. These mountains.
They’re called the Whisperheads,
and I’ve spoken to some of the
locals in Katheri. The name’s old,
sir. Really old. The locals believe
1,8,12
that a man might hear voices out
here, calling to him, when there’s
no one around. It’s an old tale.’
‘Superstition. We know this world
has temples and fanes. They are
darkage in their beliefs. Bringing
light to that ignorance is part of
why we’re here.’ ‘So what are
the voices, sir?’ ‘What?’
‘Since we’ve been here, fighting
our way up the valley, we’ve all
heard them. I’ve heard them.
Whispers. In the night, and sometimes
in the bold brightness of day when
there’s no one about, and on the
vox too. Samus has been talking.’
Loken stared at the man. The oath of
moment fixed to his shoulder plate
1,8,13
fluttered in the mountain wind.
‘Who is Samus?’ ‘Damned if I
know,’ the officer shrugged. ‘All
I know for certain is the whole vox-
net has been loopy these past few
days. Voices on the line, all saying
the same thing. A threat.’
‘They’re trying to scare us,’
Loken said. ‘Well, it worked then,
didn’t it?’ Loken walked out
across the plateau in the biting
wind, between the parked Stormbirds.
Samus was muttering again, his voice
a dry crackle in the background of
Loken’s open link. ‘Samus.
That’s the only name you’ll hear.
I’m Samus. Samus is all around you.
Samus is the man beside you. Samus
1,8,14
will gnaw upon your bones.’ Loken
was forced to admit the enemy
propaganda was good. It was
unsettling in its mystery and its
whisper. It had probably been highly
effective in the past against other
nations and cultures on Sixty-Three
Nineteen. The ‘Emperor’ had most
likely come to global power on the
basis of malignant whispers and
invisible warriors. The Astartes of
the true Emperor would not be gulled
and unmanned by such simple tools.
Some of the Luna Wolves around him
were standing still, listening to the
mutter in their helm sets. ‘Ignore
it,’ Loken told them. ‘It’s
just a game. Let’s move in.’
1,8,15
Rassek’s lumbering Terminators
approached the rock bridges, arches
of granite and lava that linked the
plateau to the fierce verticality of
the peaks. These were natural spans
left behind by the action of ancient
glaciers. Corpses, some of them
reduced to desiccated mummies by the
altitude, littered the plateau shelf
and the rock bridges. The officer had
not been lying. Hundreds of army
troopers had been cut down in the
various attempts to storm the high
fortresses. The field of fire had
been so intense, their comrades had
not been able even to retrieve their
bodies. ‘Advance!’ Loken ordered.
Raising their storm bolters, the
1,8,16
Terminator squad began to crunch out
across the rock bridges, dislodging
white bone and rotten tunics with
their immense feet. Gunfire greeted
them immediately, blistering down
from invisible positions up in the
crags. The shots spanked and whined
off the specialised armour. Heads
set, the Terminators walked into it,
shrugging it away, like men walking
into a gale wind. What had kept the
army at bay for weeks, and cost them
dearly, merely tickled the Legion
warriors. This would be over quickly,
Loken realised. He regretted the
loyal blood  that had been wasted
needlessly. This had always been a
job for the Astartes. The front ranks
1,8,17
of the Terminator squad, halfway
across the bridges, began to fire.
Bolters and inbuilt heavy weapon
systems unloaded across the abyss,
blitzing las shots and storms of
explosive munitions at the upper
slopes. Hidden positions and
fortifications exploded, and limp,
tangled bodies tumbled away into the
chasm below in flurries of rock and
ice. ‘Samus’ began his worrying
again. ‘Samus. That’s the only
name you’ll hear. Samus. It means
the end and the death. Samus. I am
Samus. Samus is all around you. Samus
is the man beside you. Samus will
gnaw upon your bones. Look out! Samus
is here.’ ‘Advance!’ Loken
1,8,18
cried, ‘and please, someone, shut
that bastard up!’ ‘And who’s
Samus?’ Borodin Flora asked. The
remembrancers, with an escort of army
troopers and servitors, had just
disembarked from their lander into
the bitter cold of a township called
Kasheri. The cold mountains swooped
up beyond them into the mist. The
area had been securely occupied by
Varvaras’s troopers and war
machines. The party stepped into the
light, all of them giddy and
breathless from the altitude. Keeler
was calibrating her picter against
the harsh glare, trying to slow her
desperate breath-rate. She was
annoyed. They’d set down in a safe
1,8,19
zone, a long way back from the actual
fighting area. There was nothing to
see. They were being handled. The
town was a bleak outcrop of
longhouses in a lower gorge below the
peaks. It looked like it hadn’t
changed much in centuries. There were
opportunities for shots of rustic
dwellings or parked army war
machines, but nothing significant.
The glaring light had a pure quality,
though. There was a thin rain in it.
Some of the servitors had been
instructed to carry the
remembrancers’ bags, but the rest
were fighting to keep parasol
canopies upright over the heads of
the party in the crosswind. Keeler
1,8,20
felt they all looked like some idle
gang of aristos on a grand tour,
exposing themselves not to risk but
to some vague, stage-managed version
of danger. ‘Where are the
Astartes?’ she asked. ‘When do we
approach the war zone?’ ‘Never
mind that,’ Flora interrupted.
‘Who is Samus?’ ‘Samus?’
Sindermann asked, puzzled. He had
walked a short distance away from the
group beside the lander into a
scrubby stretch of white grass and
sand, from where he could overlook
the misty depth of the rainswept
gorge. He looked small, as if he was
about to address the canyon as an
audience. ‘I keep hearing it,’
1,8,21
Flora insisted, following him. He was
having trouble catching a breath.
Flora wore an earplug so he could
listen in to the military’s vox
traffic. ‘I heard it too,’ said
one of the protection squad soldiers
from behind his fogged rebreather.
‘The vox has been playing up,’
said another. ‘All the way down to
the surface,’ said the officer in
charge. ‘Ignore it.
Interference.’ ‘I’ve been told
it’s been happening for days
here,’ Van Krasten said. ‘It’s
nothing,’ said Sindermann. He
looked pale and fragile, as if he
might be about to faint from the
airlessness. ‘The captain says
1,8,22
it’s scare tactics,’ said one of
the troopers. ‘The captain is
surely right,’ said Sindermann. He
took out his data-slate, and
connected it to the fleet archive
base. As an afterthought, he
uncoupled his rebreather mask and set
it to his face, sucking in oxygen
from the compact tank strapped to his
hip. After a few moments’
consultation, he said, ‘Oh,
that’s interesting.’ ‘What
is?’ asked Keeler. ‘Nothing.
It’s nothing. The captain is right.
Spread yourselves out, please, and
look around. The soldiers here will
be happy to answer any questions.
Feel free to inspect the war
1,8,23
machines.’ The remembrancers
glanced at one another and began to
disperse. Each one was followed by an
obedient servitor with a parasol and
a couple of grumpy soldiers. ‘We
might as well not have come,’
Keeler said. ‘The mountains are
splendid,’ Sark said. ‘Bugger the
mountains. Other worlds have
mountains. Listen.’ They listened.
A deep, distant booming rolled down
the gorge to them. The sound of a war
happening somewhere else. Keeler
nodded in the direction of the noise.
‘That’s where we ought to be.
I’m going to ask the iterator why
we’re stuck here.’ ‘Best of
luck,’ said Sark. Sindermann had
1,8,24
walked away from the group to stand
under the eaves of one of the
mountain town’s crude longhouse
dwellings. He continued to  study his
slate. The mountain wind nodded the
tusks of dry grass sprouting from the
white sand around his feet. Rain
pattered down. Keeler went over to
him. Two soldiers and a servitor with
a parasol began to follow her. She
turned to face them. ‘Don’t
bother,’ she said. They stopped in
their tracks and allowed her to walk
away, alone. By the time she reached
the iterator, she was sucking on her
own oxygen supply. Sindermann was
entirely occupied with his dataslate.
She held off with her complaint for a
1,8,25
moment, curious. ‘There’s
something wrong, isn’t there?’
she asked quietly. ‘No, not at
all,’ Sindermann said. ‘You’ve
found out what Samus is, haven’t
you?’ He looked at her and smiled.
‘Yes. You’re very tenacious,
Euphrati.’ ‘Born that way. What
is it, sir?’ Sindermann shrugged.
‘It’s silly,’ he said, showing
her the screen of the data-slate.
‘The background history we’ve
already been able to absorb from this
world features the name Samus, and
the Whisper-heads. It seems this is a
sacred place to the people of Sixty-
Three Nineteen. A holy, haunted
place, where the alleged barrier
1,8,26
between reality and the spirit world
is at its most permeable. This is
intriguing. I am endlessly fascinated
by the belief systems and
superstitions of primitive worlds.’
‘What does your slate tell you,
sir?’ Keeler asked. ‘It says…
this is quite funny. I suppose it
would be scary, if one actually
believed in such things. It says that
the Whisperheads are the one place on
this world where the spirits walk and
speak. It mentions Samus as chief of
those spirits. Local, and very
ancient, legend, tells how one of the
emperors battled and restrained a
nightmarish force of devilry here.
The devil was called Samus. It is
1,8,27
here in their myths, you see? We had
one of our own, in the very antique
days, called Seytan, or Tearmat.
Samus is the equivalent.’ ‘Samus
is a spirit, then?’ Keeler
whispered, feeling unpleasantly
lightheaded. ‘Yes. Why do you
ask?’ ‘Because,’ said Keeler,
‘I’ve heard him hissing at me
since the moment we touched down. And
I don’t have a vox.’ Beyond the
rock bridges, the insurgents had
raised shield walls of stone and
metal. They had heavy cannons
covering the gully approaches to
their fortress, wired munition
charges in the narrow defiles,
electrified razor wire, bolted storm-
1,8,28
doors, barricades of rockcrete blocks
and heavy iron poles. They had a few
automated sentry devices, and the
advantage of the sheer drop and
unscalable ice all around. They had
faith and their god on their side.
They had held off Varvaras’s
regiments for six weeks. They had no
chance whatsoever. Nothing they did
even delayed the advance of the Luna
Wolves. Shrugging off cannon rounds
and the backwash of explosives, the
Terminators wrenched their way
through the shield walls, and blasted
down the storm-doors. They crushed
the spark of electric life out of the
sentry drones with their mighty
claws, and pushed down the heaped
1,8,29
barricades with their shoulders. The
company flooded in behind them,
firing their weapons into the rising
smoke. The fortress itself had been
built into the mountain peak. Some
sections of roof and battlement were
visible from outside, but most of the
structure lay within, thickly
armoured by hundreds of metres of
rock. The Luna Wolves poured in
through the fortified gates. Assault
squads rose up the mountain face on
their jump packs and settled like
flocks of white birds on the exposed
roofs, ripping them apart to gain
entry and drop in from above.
Explosions ripped out the interior
chambers of the fortress, opening
1,8,30
them to the air, and sending rafts of
dislodged ice and rock crashing down
into the gorge. The interior was a
maze of wet-black rock tunnels and
old tile work, through which the wind
funnelled so sharply it seemed to be
hyperventilating. The bodies of the
slain lay everywhere, slumped and
twisted, sprawled and broken.
Stepping over them, Loken pitied
them. Their culture had deceived them
into this resistance, and the
resistance had brought down the wrath
of the Astartes on their heads. They
had all but invited a catastrophic
doom. Terrible human screams echoed
down the windy rock tunnels,
punctuated by the door-slam bangs of
1,8,31
bolter fire. Loken hadn’t even
bothered to keep a tally of his
kills. There was little glory in
this, just duty. A surgical strike by
the Emperor’s martial instruments.
Gunfire pinked off his armour, and he
turned, without really thinking, and
cut down his assailants. Two
desperate men in mail shirts
disintegrated under his fire and
spattered across a wall. He
couldn’t understand why they were
still fighting. If they’d ventured
a surrender, he would have accepted
it.  ‘That way,’ he ordered, and
a squad moved up past him into the
next series of chambers. As he
followed them, a body on the floor at
1,8,32
his feet stirred and moaned. The
insurgent, smeared in his own blood
and gravely wounded, looked up at
Loken with glassy eyes. He whispered
something. Loken knelt down and
cradled his enemy’s head in one
massive hand. ‘What did you say?’
‘Bless me…’ the man whispered.
‘I can’t.’ ‘Please, say a
prayer and commend me to the gods.’
‘I can’t. There are no gods.’
‘Please… the otherworld will shun
me if I die without a prayer.’
‘I’m sorry,’ Loken said.
‘You’re dying. That’s all there
is.’ ‘Help me…’ the man
gasped. ‘Of course,’ Loken said.
He drew his combat blade, the
1,8,33
standard-issue short, stabbing sword,
and activated the power cell. The
grey blade glowed with force. Loken
cut down and sharply back up again in
the mercy stroke, and gently set the
man’s detached head on the ground.
The next chamber was vast and
irregular. Meltwater trickled down
from the black ceiling, and formed
spurs of glistening mineral, like
silver whiskers, on the rocks it ran
over. A pool had been cut in the
centre of the chamber floor to
collect the meltwater, probably as
one of the fortress’s primary water
reserves. The squad he had sent on
had come to a halt around its lip.
‘Report,’ he said. One of the
1,8,34
Wolves looked round. ‘What is this,
captain?’ he asked. Loken stepped
forward to join them and saw that a
great number of bottles and glass
flasks had been set around the pool,
many of them in the path of the
trickling feed from above. At first,
he assumed they were there to collect
the water, but there were other items
too: coins, brooches, strange doll-
like figures of clay and the head
bones of small mammals and lizards.
The spattering water fell across
them, and had evidently done so for
some time, for Loken could see that
many of the bottles and other items
were gleaming and distorted with
mineral deposits. On the overhang of
1,8,35
rock above the pool, ancient, eroded
script had been chiselled. Loken
couldn’t read the words, and
realised he didn’t want to. There
were symbols there that made him feel
curiously uneasy. ‘It’s a
fane,’ he said simply. ‘You know
what these locals are like. They
believe in spirits, and these are
offerings.’ The men glanced at one
another, not really understanding.
‘They believe in things that
aren’t real?’ asked one.
‘They’ve been deceived,’ Loken
said. ‘That’s why we’re here.
Destroy this,’ he instructed, and
turned away. The assault lasted
sixty-eight minutes, start to finish.
1,8,36
By the end, the fastness was a
smoking ruin, many sections of it
blown wide to the fierce sunlight and
mountain air. Not a single Luna Wolf
had been lost. Not a single insurgent
had survived. ‘How many?’ Loken
asked Rassek. ‘They’re still
counting bodies, captain,’ Rassek
replied. ‘As it stands, nine
hundred and seventy-two.’ In the
course of the assault, something in
the region of thirty meltwater fanes
had been discovered in the
labyrinthine fortress, pools
surrounded by offerings. Loken
ordered them all expunged. ‘They
were guarding the last outpost of
their faith,’ Nero Vipus remarked.
1,8,37
‘I suppose so,’ Loken replied.
‘You don’t like it, do you,
Garvi?’ Vipus asked. ‘I hate to
see men die for no reason. I hate to
see men give their lives like this,
for nothing. For a belief in nothing.
It sickens me. This is what we were
once, Nero. Zealots, spiritualists,
believers in lies we’d made up
ourselves. The Emperor showed us the
path out of that madness.’ ‘So be
of good humour that we’ve taken
it,’ Vipus said. ‘And, though we
spill their blood, be phlegmatic that
we’re at last bringing truth to our
lost brothers here.’ Loken nodded.
‘I feel sorry for them,’ he said.
‘They must be so scared.’ ‘Of
1,8,38
us?’ ‘Yes, of course, but
that’s not what I mean. Scared of
the truth we bring. We’re trying to
teach them that there are no greater
forces at work in the galaxy than
light, gravity and human will. No
wonder they cling to their gods and
spirits. We’re removing every last
crutch of their ignorance. They felt
safe until we came. Safe in the
custody of the spirits that they
believed watched over them. Safe in
the ideal that there was an
afterlife, an otherworld. They
thought they would be immortal,
beyond flesh.’  ‘Now they have
met real immortals,’ Vipus quipped.
‘It’s a hard lesson, but
1,8,39
they’ll be better for it in the
long run.’ Loken shrugged. ‘I
just empathise, I suppose. Their
lives were comforted by mysteries,
and we’ve taken that comfort away.
All we can show them is a hard and
unforgiving reality in which their
lives are brief and without higher
purpose.’ ‘Speaking of higher
purpose,’ Vipus said, ‘you should
signal the fleet and tell them
we’re done. The iterators have
voxed us. They request permission to
bring the observers up to the site
here.’ ‘Grant it. I’ll signal
the fleet and give them the good
news.’ Vipus turned away, then
halted. ‘At least that voice shut
1,8,40
up,’ he said. Loken nodded.
‘Samus’ had quit his maudlin
ramblings half an hour since, though
the assault had failed to identify
any vox system or broadcast device.
Loken’s intervox crackled.
‘Captain?’ ‘Jubal? Go ahead.’
‘Captain, I’m…’ ‘What?
You’re what? Say again, Jubal.’
‘Sorry, captain. I need you to see
this. I’m… I mean, I need you to
see this. It’s Samus.’ ‘What?
Jubal, where are you?’ ‘Follow my
locator. I’ve found something.
I’m… I’ve found something.
Samus. It means the end and the
death.’ ‘What have you found,
Jubal?’ ‘I’m… I’ve found…
1,8,41
Captain, Samus is here.’ Loken left
Vipus to orchestrate the clean-up,
and descended into the bowels of the
fastness with Seventh Squad,
following the pip of Jubal’s
locator. Seventh Squad, Brakespur
Tactical Squad, was commanded by
Sergeant Udon, one of Loken’s most
reliable warriors. The locator led
them down to a massive stone well in
the very basement of the fortress,
deep in the heart of the mountain.
They gained access to it via a
corroded iron gate built into a niche
in the dark stone. The dank chamber
beyond the gate was a natural,
vertical split in the mountain rock,
a slanting cavern that overlooked a
1,8,42
deep fault where only blackness could
be detected.  A pier of old stone
steps arced out over the abyss, which
dropped away into the very bottom of
the mountain. Meltwater sprinkled
down the glistening walls of the
cavern well. The wind whined through
invisible fissures and vents. Xavyer
Jubal was alone at the edge of the
drop. As Loken and Seventh Squad
approached, Loken wondered where the
rest of Helle-bore had gone.
‘Xavyer?’ Loken called. Jubal
looked around. ‘Captain,’ he
said. ‘I’ve found something
wonderful.’ ‘What?’ ‘See?’
Jubal said. ‘See the words?’
Loken stared where Jubal was
1,8,43
pointing. All he saw was water
streaming down a calcified buttress
of rock. ‘No. What words?’
‘There! There!’ ‘I see only
water,’ Loken said. ‘Falling
water.’ ‘Yes, yes! It’s written
in the water! In the falling water!
There and gone, there and gone, You
see? It makes words and they stream
away, but the words come back.’
‘Xavyer? Are you well? I’m
concerned that–’ ‘Look,
Garviel! Look at the words! Can’t
you hear the water speaking?’
‘Speaking?’ ‘Drip drip drop.
One name. Samus. That’s the only
name you’ll hear.’ ‘Samus?’
‘Samus. It means the end and the
1,8,44
death. I’m…’ Loken looked at
Udon and the men. ‘Restrain him,’
he said quietly. Udon nodded. He and
four of his men slung their bolters
and stepped forward. ‘What are you
doing?’ Jubal laughed. ‘Are you
threatening me? For Terra’s sake,
Garviel, can’t you see? Samus is
all around you!’ ‘Where’s
Hellebore, Jubal?’ Loken snapped.
‘Where’s the rest of your
squad?’ Jubal shrugged. ‘They
didn’t see it either,’ he said,
and glanced towards the edge of the
precipice. ‘They couldn’t see, I
suppose. It’s so clear to me. Samus
is the man beside you.’ ‘Udon,’
Loken nodded. Udon moved towards
1,8,45
Jubal. ‘Let’s go, brother,’ he
said, kindly.  Jubal’s bolter came
up very suddenly. There was no
warning. He shot Udon in the face,
blowing gore and pulverised skull
fragments out through the back of
Udon’s exploded helm. Udon fell on
his face. Two of his men lunged
forward, and the bolter roared again,
punching holes in their chestplates
and throwing them over onto their
backs. Jubal’s visor swung to look
at Loken. ‘I’m Samus,’ he said,
chuckling. ‘Look out! Samus is
here.’  
1,8,46
NINE
 The unthinkable
Spirits of the Whisperheads
Compatible minds Two days before the
Legion’s assault on the
Whisperheads, Loken had consented to
another private interview with the
remembrancer Mersadie Oliton. It was
the third such interview he had
granted since his election to the
Mournival, at which time his attitude
towards her seemed to have
substantially altered. Though the
subject had not been mentioned
formally, Mersadie had begun to feel
that Loken had chosen her to be his
particular memorialist. He had told
her on the night of his election that
1,9,1
he might choose to share his
recollections with her, but she was
now secretly astonished at the extent
of his eagerness to do so. She had
already recorded almost six hours of
reminiscence – accounts of battles
and tactics, descriptions of
especially demanding military
operations, reflections on the
qualities of certain types of weapon,
celebrations of notable deeds and
triumphs accomplished by his
comrades. In the time between
interviews, she took herself to her
room and processed the material,
composing it into the skeleton of a
long, fluid account. She hoped
eventually to have a complete history
1,9,2
of the expedition, and a more general
record of the Great Crusade as
witnessed by Loken during the other
expeditions that had preceded the
63rd. Indeed, the weight of anecdotal
fact she was gathering was huge, but
one thing was lacking, and that was
Loken himself. In the latest
interview, she tried once again to
draw out some spark of the man. ‘As
I understand it,’ she said, ‘you
have nothing in you that we ordinary
mortals might know as fear?’  Loken
paused and frowned. He had been
lapping a plate section of his
armour. This seemed to be his
favourite diversion when in her
company. He would call her to his
1,9,3
private arming chamber and sit there,
scrupulously polishing his war
harness while he spoke and she
listened. To Mersadie, the particular
smell of the lapping powder had
become synonymous with the sound of
his voice and the matter of his
tales. He had well over a century of
stories to tell. ‘A curious
question,’ he said. ‘And how
curious is the answer?’ Loken
shrugged lightly. ‘The Astartes
have no fear. It is unthinkable to
us.’ ‘Because you have trained
yourself to master it?’ Mersadie
asked. ‘No, we are trained for
discipline, but the capacity for fear
is bred out of us. We are immune to
1,9,4
its touch.’ Mersadie made a mental
note to edit this last comment later.
To her, it seemed to leach away some
of the heroic mystique of the
Astartes. To deny fear was the very
character of a hero, but there was
nothing courageous about being
insensible to the emotion. She
wondered too if it was possible to
simply remove an entire emotion from
what was essentially a human mind.
Did that not leave a void? Were other
emotions compromised by its lack?
Could fear even be removed cleanly,
or did its excision tear out shreds
of other qualities along with it? It
certainly might explain why the
Astartes seemed larger than life in
1,9,5
almost every aspect except their own
personalities. ‘Well, let us
continue,’ she said. ‘At our last
meeting, you were going to tell me
about the war against the overseers.
That was twenty years ago, wasn’t
it?’ He was still looking at her,
eyes slightly narrowed. ‘What?’
he asked. ‘I’m sorry?’ ‘What
is it? You didn’t like my answer
just then.’ Mersadie cleared her
throat. ‘No, not at all. It
wasn’t that. I had just been…’
‘What?’ ‘May I be candid?’
‘Of course,’ he said, patiently
rubbing a nub of polishing fibre
around the edges of a pot. ‘I had
been hoping to get something a little
1,9,6
more personal. You have given me a
great deal, sir, authentic details
and points of fact that would make
any  history text authoritative.
Posterity will know with precision,
for instance, which hand Iacton Qruze
carried his sword in, the colour of
the sky over the Monastery Cities of
Nabatae, the methodology of the White
Scars’ favoured pincer assault, the
number of studs on the shoulder plate
of a Luna Wolf, the number of axe
blows, and from which angles, it took
to fell the last of the Omakkad
Princes…’ She looked at him
squarely, ‘but nothing about you,
sir. I know what you saw, but not
what you felt.’ ‘What I felt? Why
1,9,7
would anyone be interested in
that?’ ‘Humanity is a sensible
race, sir. Future generations, those
that our remembrances are intended
for, will learn more from any factual
record if those facts are couched in
an emotional context. They will care
less for the details of the battles
at Ullanor, for instance, than they
will for a sense of what it felt like
to be there.’ ‘Are you saying
that I’m boring?’ Loken asked.
‘No, not at all,’ she began, and
then realised he was smiling. ‘Some
of the things you have told me sound
like wonders, yet you do not yourself
seem to wonder at them. If you know
no fear, do you also not know awe?
1,9,8
Surprise? Majesty? Have you not seen
things so bizarre they left you
speechless? Shocked you? Unnerved you
even?’ ‘I have,’ he said.
‘Many times the sheer oddity of the
cosmos has left me bemused or
startled.’ ‘So tell me of those
things.’ He pursed his lips and
thought about it. ‘Giant hats,’
he began. ‘I beg your pardon?’
‘On Sarosel, after compliance, the
citizens held a great carnival of
celebration. Compliance had been
bloodless and willing. The carnival
ran for eight weeks. The dancers in
the streets wore giant hats of ribbon
and cane and paper, each one
fashioned into some gaudy form: a
1,9,9
ship, a sword and fist, a dragon, a
sun. They were as broad across as my
span.’ Loken spread his arms wide.
‘I do not know how they balanced
them, or suffered their weight, but
day and night they danced along the
inner streets of the main city, these
garish forms weaving and bobbing and
circling, as if carried along on a
slow flood, quite obscuring the human
figures beneath. It was an odd
sight.’ ‘I believe you.’ ‘It
made us laugh. It made Horus laugh to
see it.’ ‘Was that the strangest
thing you ever knew?’  ‘No, no.
Let’s see… the method of war on
Keylek gave us all pause. This was
eighty years ago. The keylekid were a
1,9,10
grosteque alien kind, of a manner you
might describe as reptilian. They
were greatly skilled in the arts of
combat, and rose against us angrily
the moment we made contact. Their
world was a harsh place. I remember
crimson rock and indigo water. The
commander – this was long before he
was made Warmaster – expected a
prolonged and brutal struggle, for
the keylekid were large and strong
creatures. Even the least of their
warriors took three or four bolt
rounds to bring down. We drew forth
upon their world to make war, but
they would not fight us.’ ‘How
so?’ ‘We did not comprehend the
rules they fought by. As we learned
1,9,11
later, the keylekid considered war to
be the most abhorrent activity a
sentient race could indulge in, so
they set upon it tight controls and
restrictions. There were large
structures upon the surface of their
world, rectangular fields many
kilometres in dimension, covered with
high, flat roofs and open at the
sides. We named them “slaughter-
houses”, and there was one every
few hundred kilometres. The keylekid
would only fight at these prescribed
places. The sites were reserved for
combat. War was forbidden on any
other part of their world’s
surface. They were waiting for us to
meet them at a slaughter-house and
1,9,12
decide the matter.’ ‘How bizarre!
What was done about it?’ ‘We
destroyed the keylekid,’ he said,
matter of factly. ‘Oh,’ she
replied, with a tilt of her
abnormally long head. ‘It was
suggested that we might meet them and
fight them by the terms of their
rules,’ Loken said. ‘There may
have been some honour in that, but
Maloghurst, I think it was, reasoned
that we had rules of our own which
the enemy chose not to recognise.
Besides, they were formidable. Had we
not acted decisively, they would have
remained a threat, and how long would
it have taken them to learn new rules
or abandon old ones?’ ‘Is an
1,9,13
image of them recorded?’ Mersadie
asked. ‘Many, I believe. The
preserved cadaver of one of their
warriors is displayed in this
ship’s Museum of Conquest, and
since you ask what I feel, sometimes
it is sadness. You mentioned the
overseers, a story I was going to
tell. That was a long campaign, and
one which filled me with misery.’
As he told the story, she sat back,
occasionally blink-clicking to store
his  image. He was concentrating on
the preparation of his armour, but
she could see sadness behind that
concern. The over-seers, he
explained, were a machine race and,
as artificial sentients, quite beyond
1,9,14
the limits of Imperial law. Machine
life untempered by organic components
had long been outlawed by both the
Imperial Council and the Mechanicum.
The overseers, commanded by a senior
machine called the Archdroid,
inhabited a series of derelict,
crumbling cities on the world of
Dahinta. These were cities of fine
mosaics, which had once been very
beautiful indeed, but extreme age and
decay had faded them. The overseers
scuttled amongst the mouldering
piles, fighting a losing battle of
repair and refurbishment in a single-
minded obsession to keep the
neglected cities intact. The machines
had eventually been destroyed after a
1,9,15
lasting and brutal war in which the
skills of the Mechanicum had proved
invaluable. Only then was the sad
secret found. ‘The overseers were
the product of human ingenuity,’
Loken said. ‘Humans made them?’
‘Yes, thousands of years ago,
perhaps even during the last Age of
Technology. Dahinta had been a human
colony, home to a lost branch of our
race, where they had raised a great
and marvellous culture of magnificent
cities, with thinking machines to
serve them. At some time, and in a
manner unknown to us, the humans had
become extinct. They left behind
their ancient cities, empty but for
the deathless guardians they had
1,9,16
made. It was most melancholy, and
passing strange.’ ‘Did the
machines not recognise men?’ she
asked. ‘All they saw was the
Astartes, lady, and we did not look
like the men they had called
master.’ She hesitated for a
moment, then said, ‘I wonder if I
shall witness so many marvels as we
make this expedition.’ ‘I trust
you will, and I hope that many will
fill you with joy and amazement
rather than distress. I should tell
you sometime of the Great Triumph
after Ullanor. That was an event that
should be remembered.’ ‘I look
forward to hearing it.’ ‘There is
no time now. I have duties to attend
1,9,17
to.’ ‘One last story, then? A
short one, perhaps? Something that
filled you with awe.’ He sat back
and thought. ‘There was a thing. No
more than ten years ago.  We found a
dead world where life had once been.
A species had lived there once, and
either died out or moved to another
world. They had left behind them a
honeycomb of subterranean habitats,
dry and dead. We searched them
carefully, every last cave and
tunnel, and found just one thing of
note. It was buried deepest of all,
in a stone bunker ten kilometres
under the planet’s crust. A map. A
great chart, in fact, fully twenty
metres in diameter, showing the
1,9,18
geophysical relief of an entire world
in extraordinary detail. We did not
at first recognise it, but the
Emperor, beloved of all, knew what it
was.’ ‘What?’ she asked. ‘It
was Terra. It was a complete and full
map of Terra, perfect in every
detail. But it was a map of Terra
from an age long gone, before the
rise of the hives or the molestation
of war, with coastlines and oceans
and mountains of an aspect long since
erased or covered over.’ ‘That
is… amazing,’ she said. He
nodded. ‘So many unanswerable
questions, locked into one forgotten
chamber. Who had made the map, and
why? What business had brought them
1,9,19
to Terra so long ago? What had caused
them to carry the chart across half
the galaxy, and then hide it away,
like their most precious treasure, in
the depths of their world? It was
unthinkable. I cannot feel fear,
Mistress Olitan, but if I could I
would have felt it then. I cannot
imagine anything ever unsettling my
soul the way that thing did.’
Unthinkable. Time had slowed to a
pinprick point on which it seemed all
the gravity in the cosmos was
pressing. Loken felt lead-heavy,
slow, out of joint, unable to frame a
lucid response, or even begin to deal
with what he was seeing. Was this
fear? Was he tasting it now, after
1,9,20
all? Was this how terror cowed a
mortal man? Sergeant Udon, his helm a
deformed ring of bloody ceramite, lay
dead at his feet. Beside him sprawled
two other battle-brothers, shot
point-blank through the hearts, if
not dead then fatally damaged. Before
him stood Jubal, the bolter in his
hand. This was madness. This could
not be. Astartes had turned upon
Astartes. A Luna Wolf had murdered
his own kind. Every law of fraternity
and honour that Loken understood and
trusted had just been torn as easily
as a cobweb.  The insanity of this
crime would echo forever. ‘Jubal?
What have you done?’ ‘Not Jubal.
Samus. I am Samus. Samus is all
1,9,21
around you. Samus is the man beside
you.’ Jubal’s voice had a catch
to it, a dry giggle. Loken knew he
was about to fire again. The rest of
Udon’s squad, quite as aghast as
Loken, stumbled forward, but none
raised their bolters. Even in the
stark light of what Jubal had just
done, not one of them could break the
sworn code of the Astartes and fire
upon one of their own. Loken knew he
certainly couldn’t. He threw his
bolter aside and leapt at Jubal.
Xavyer Jubal, commander of Hellebore
squad and one of the finest file
officers in the company, had already
begun to fire. Bolt rounds screeched
out across the chamber and struck
1,9,22
into the hesitating squad. Another
helmet exploded in a welter of blood,
bone chips and armour fragments, and
another battle-brother crashed to the
cave floor. Two more were knocked
down beside him as bolt rounds
detonated against their torso armour.
Loken smashed into Jubal, and
staggered him backwards, trying to
pin his arms. Jubal thrashed, sudden
fury in his limbs. ‘Samus!’ he
yelled. ‘It means the end and the
death! Samus will gnaw upon your
bones!’ They crashed against a rock
wall together with numbing force,
splintering stone. Jubal would not
relinquish his grip on the murder
weapon. Loken drove him backwards
1,9,23
against the rock, the drizzle of
meltwater spraying down across them
both. ‘Jubal!’ Loken threw a
punch that would have decapitated a
mortal man. His fist cracked against
Jubal’s helm and he repeated the
action, driving his fist four or five
times against the other’s face and
chest. The ceramite visor chipped.
Another punch, his full weight behind
it, and Jubal stumbled. Each stroke
of Loken’s fist resounded like a
smith’s hammer in the echoing
chamber, steel against steel. As
Jubal stumbled, Loken grabbed his
bolter and tore it out of his hand.
He hurled it away across the deep
stone well. But Jubal was not yet
1,9,24
done. He seized Loken and slammed him
sideways into the rock wall. Lumps of
stone flew out from the jarring
impact. Jubal  slammed him again,
swinging Loken bodily into the rock,
like a man swinging a heavy sack.
Pain flared through Loken’s head
and he tasted blood in his mouth. He
tried to pull away, but Jubal was
throwing punches that ploughed into
Loken’s visor and bounced the back
of his head off the wall repeatedly.
The other men were upon them,
shouting and grappling to separate
them. ‘Hold him!’ Loken yelled.
‘Hold him down!’ They were
Astartes, as strong as young gods in
their power armour, but they could
1,9,25
not do as Loken ordered. Jubal lashed
out with a free fist and knocked one
of them clean off his feet. Two of
the remaining three clung to his back
like wrestlers, like human cloaks,
trying to pull him down, but he
hoisted them up and twisted, throwing
them off him. Such strength. Such
unthinkable strength that could shrug
off Astartes like target dummies in a
practice cage. Jubal turned on the
remaining brother, who launched
himself forward to tackle the madman.
‘Look out!’ Jubal screamed with a
cackle. ‘Samus is here!’ His
lancing right hand met the brother
head on. Jubal struck with an open
hand, fingers extended, and those
1,9,26
fingers drove clean in through the
battlebrother’s gorget as surely as
any speartip. Blood squirted out from
the man’s throat, through the
puncture in the armour. Jubal ripped
his hand out, and the brother fell to
his knees, choking and gurgling,
blood pumping in profuse, pulsing
surges from his ruptured throat.
Beyond any thought of reason now,
Loken hurled himself at Jubal, but
the berserker turned and smacked him
away with a mighty back-hand slap.
The power of the blow was stupendous,
far beyond anything even an Astartes
should have been able to wield. The
force was so great that the armour of
Jubal’s gauntlet fractured, as did
1,9,27
the plating of Loken’s shoulder,
which took the brunt. Loken blacked
out for a split-second, then was
aware that he was flying. Jubal had
struck him so hard that he was
sailing across the stone well and out
over the abyssal fault. Loken struck
the arching pier of stone steps. He
almost bounced off it, but he managed
to grab on, his fingers gouging the
ancient stone, his feet swinging
above the drop. Meltwater poured down
in a thin rain across him, making the
steps slick and oily with mineral
wash. Loken’s fingers began to
slide. He remembered dangling in a
similar fashion over the tower lip in
the  ‘Emperor’s’ palace, and
1,9,28
snarled in frustrated rage. Fury
pulled him up. Fury, and an intense
passion that he would not fail the
Warmaster. Not in this. Not in the
face of this terrible wrong. He
hauled himself upright on to the
pier. It was narrow, no wider than a
single path where men could not pass
if they met. The gulf, black as the
outer void, yawned below him. His
limbs were shaking with effort. He
saw Jubal. He was charging forward
across the cavern to the foot of the
steps, drawing his combat blade. The
sword glowed as it powered into life.
Loken wrenched out his own sword.
Falling meltwater hissed and sparked
as it touched the active metal of the
1,9,29
short, stabbing blade. Jubal bounded
up the steps to meet him, slashing
with his sword. He was raving still,
in a voice that was in no way his own
any longer. He struck wildly at
Loken, who hopped back up the steps,
and then began to deflect the strikes
with his own weapon. Sparks flashed,
and the blades struck one another
like the tolling of a discordant
bell. Height was not an advantage in
this fight, as Loken had to hunch low
to maintain his guard. Combat swords
were not duelling weapons. Short and
double-edged, they were made for
stabbing, for battlefield onslaught.
They had no reach or subtlety. Jubal
hacked with his like an axe, forcing
1,9,30
Loken to defend. Their blades cut
falling water as they scythed, sizz-
ling and billowing steam into the
air. Loken prided himself on
maintaining a masterful discipline
and practice of all weapons. He
regularly clocked six or eight hours
at a time in the flagship’s
practice cages. He expected all of
the men in his command to do
likewise. Xavyer Jubal, he knew, was
foremost a master with daggers and
sparring axes, but no slouch with the
sword. Except today. Jubal had
discarded all his skill, or had
forgotten it in the flush of madness
that had engulfed his mind. He
attacked Loken like a maniac, in a
1,9,31
frenzy of savage cuts and blows.
Loken was likewise forced to dispense
with much of his skill in an effort
to block and parry. Three times,
Loken managed to drive Jubal back
down the pier a few steps, but always
the other man retaliated and forced
Loken higher up the arch. Once, Loken
had to leap to avoid a low slice, and
barely regained his footing as he
landed. In the silver downpour, the
steps were treacherous, and it was as
much a fight to keep balance as to
resist Jubal’s constant assault. It
ended suddenly, like a jolt. Jubal
passed Loken’s guard and sunk the
full  edge of his blade into
Loken’s left shoulder plate.
1,9,32
‘Samus is here!’ he cried in
delight, but his blade, flaring with
power, was wedged fast. ‘Samus is
done,’ Loken replied, and drove the
tip of his sword into Jubal’s
exposed chest. The sword punched
clean through, and the tip emerged
through Jubal’s back. Jubal
wavered, letting go of his own
weapon, which remained transfixed
through Loken’s shoulder guard.
With half-open, shuddering hands, he
reached at Loken’s face, not
violently, but gently, as if
imploring some mercy or even aid.
Water splashed off them and streamed
down their white plating.
‘Samus…’ he gasped. Loken
1,9,33
wrenched his sword out. Jubal
staggered and swayed, the blood
leaking out of the gash in his
chestplate, diluting as soon as it
appeared and mixing with the drizzle,
covering his belly plate and thigh
armour with a pink stain. He toppled
backwards, crashing over and over
down the steps in a windmill of
heavy, loose limbs. Five metres from
the base of the pier, his headlong
career bounced him half-off the
steps, and he came to a halt, legs
dangling, partly hanging over the
chasm, gradually sliding backwards
under his own weight. Loken heard the
slow squeal of armour scraping
against slick stone. He leapt down
1,9,34
the flight to reach Jubal’s side.
He got there just moments before
Jubal slid away into oblivion. Loken
grabbed Jubal by the edge of his left
shoulder plate and slowly began to
heave him back onto the pier. It was
almost impossible. Jubal seemed to
weigh a billion tonnes. The three
surviving members of Brakespur squad
stood at the foot of the steps,
watching him struggle. ‘Help me!’
Loken yelled. ‘To save him?’ one
asked. ‘Why?’ asked another.
‘Why would you want to?’ ‘Help
me!’ Loken snarled again. They
didn’t move. In desperation, Loken
raised his sword and stabbed it down,
spearing Jubal’s right shoulder to
1,9,35
the steps. So pinned, his slide was
arrested. Loken hauled his body back
onto the pier. Panting, Loken dragged
off his battered helm and spat out a
mouthful of blood. ‘Get Vipus,’
he ordered. ‘Get him now.’  By
the time they were conducted up to
the plateau, there wasn’t much to
see and the light was failing.
Euphrati took a few random picts of
the parked Stormbirds and the cone of
smoke lifting off the broken crag,
but she didn’t expect much from any
of them. It all seemed drab and
lifeless up there. Even the vista of
the mountains around them was
insipid. ‘Can we see the combat
area?’ she asked Sindermann.
1,9,36
‘We’ve been told to wait.’
‘Is there a problem?’ He shook
his head. It was an ‘I don’t
know’ kind of shake. Like all of
them, he was strapped into his
rebreather, but he looked frail and
tired. It was eerily quiet. Groups of
Luna Wolves were trudging back to the
Stormbirds from the fastness, and
army troops had secured the plateau
itself. The remembrancers had been
told that a solid victory had been
achieved, but there was no sign of
jubilation. ‘Oh, it’s a
mechanical thing,’ Sindermann said
when Euphrati questioned him. ‘This
is just a routine exercise for the
Legion. A low-key action, as I said
1,9,37
before we set out. I’m sorry if
you’re disappointed.’ ‘I’m
not,’ she said, but in truth there
was a sense of anticlimax about it
all. She wasn’t sure what she had
been expecting, but the rush of the
drop, and the strange circumstance at
Kasheri had begun to thrill her. Now
everything was done, and she’d seen
nothing. ‘Carnis wants to interview
some of the returning warriors,’
Siman Sark said, ‘and he’s asked
me to pict them while he does. Would
that be permissible?’ ‘I should
think so,’ Sindermann sighed. He
called out for an army officer to
guide Carnis and Sark to the
Astartes. ‘I think,’ said Tolemew
1,9,38
Van Krasten aloud, ‘that a tone
poem would be most appropriate. Full
symphonic composition would overwhelm
the atmosphere, I feel.’ Euphrati
nodded, not really understanding.
‘A minor key, I think. E, or A
perhaps. I’m taken with the title
“The Spirits of the
Whisperheads”, or perhaps, “The
Voice of Samus”. What do you
think?’ She stared at him. ‘I’m
joking,’ he said with a sad smile.
‘I have no idea what I am supposed
to respond to here, or how. It all
seems so dour.’  Euphrati Keeler
had supposed Van Krasten to be a
pompous type, but now she warmed to
him. As he turned away and gazed
1,9,39
mournfully up at the smoking peak,
she was seized by a thought and
raised her picter. ‘Did you just
take my likeness?’ he asked. She
nodded. ‘Do you mind? You looking
at the peak like that seemed to sum
up how we all feel.’ ‘But I’m a
remembrancer,’ he said. ‘Should I
be in your record?’ ‘We’re all
in this. Witnesses or not, we’re
all here,’ she replied. ‘I take
what I see. Who knows? Maybe you can
return the favour? A little refrain
of flutes in your next overture that
represents Euphrati Keeler?’ They
both laughed. A Luna Wolf was
approaching the huddle of them.
‘Nero Vipus,’ he said, making the
1,9,40
sign of the aquila. ‘Captain Loken
presents his respects and wishes the
attention of Master Sindermann at
once.’ ‘I’m Sindermann,’ the
elderly man replied. ‘Is there some
problem, sir?’ ‘I’ve been asked
to conduct you to the captain,’
Vipus replied. ‘This way,
please.’ The pair of them moved
away, Sindermann scurrying to keep up
with Vipus’s great strides. ‘What
is going on?’ Van Krasten asked,
his voice hushed. ‘I don’t know.
Let’s find out,’ Keeler replied.
‘Follow them? Oh, I don’t think
so.’ ‘I’m game,’ said Borodin
Flora. ‘We haven’t actually been
told to stay here.’ They looked
1,9,41
round. Twell had sat himself down
beside the prow landing strut of a
Stormbird and was beginning to sketch
with charcoal sticks on a small pad.
Carnis and Sark were busy elsewhere.
‘Come on,’ said Euphrati Keeler.
Vipus led Sindermann up into the
ruined fastness. The wind moaned and
whistled through the grim tunnels and
chambers. Army troopers were clearing
the dead from the entry halls and
casting them into the gorge, but
still Vipus had to steer the iterator
past many crumpled, exploded corpses.
He kept saying such things as,
‘I’m sorry you had to see that,
sir,’ and, ‘Look away to spare
your sensibilities.’  Sindermann
1,9,42
could not look away. He had iterated
loyally for many years, but this was
the first time he had walked across a
fresh battlefield. The sights
appalled him and burned themselves
into his memory. The stench of blood
and ordure assailed him. He saw human
forms burst and brutalised, and
burned beyond any measure he had
imagined possible. He saw walls
sticky with blood and brain-matter,
fragments of exploded bone weeping
marrow, body parts littering the
blood-soaked floors. ‘Terra,’ he
breathed, over and again. This was
what the Astartes did. This was the
reality of the Emperor’s crusade.
Mortal hurt on a scale that passed
1,9,43
belief. ‘Terra,’ he whispered to
himself. By the time he was brought
to Loken, who awaited him in one of
the fortress’s upper chambers, the
word had become ‘terror’ without
him realising it. Loken was standing
in a wide, dark chamber beside some
sort of pool. Water gurgled down one
of the black-wet walls and the air
smelled of damp and oxides. A dozen
solemn Luna Wolves attended Loken,
including one giant fellow in
glowering Terminator armour, but
Loken himself was bareheaded. His
face was smudged with bruises. He’d
removed his left shoulder guard,
which lay beside him on the ground,
stuck through with a short sword.
1,9,44
‘You have done such a thing,’
Sindermann said, his voice small.
‘I don’t think I’d quite
understood what you Astartes were
capable of, but now I–’
‘Quiet,’ Loken said bluntly. He
looked at the Luna Wolves around him
and dismissed them with a nod. They
filed out past Sindermann, ignoring
him. ‘Stay close, Nero,’ Loken
called. Stepping out through the
chamber door, Vipus nodded. Now the
room was almost empty, Sindermann
could see that a body lay beside the
pool. It was the body of a Luna Wolf,
limp and dead, his helm off, his
white armour mottled with blood. His
arms had been lashed to his trunk
1,9,45
with climbing cable. ‘I
don’t…’ Sindermann began. ‘I
don’t understand, captain. I was
told there had been no losses.’
Loken nodded slowly. ‘That’s what
we’re going to say. That will be
the official line. The Tenth took
this fortress in a clean strike, with
no losses, and that’s true enough.
None of the insurgents scored any
kills. Not even a wounding. We took a
thousand of them to their deaths.’
‘But this man…?’ Loken looked
at Sindermann. His face was troubled,
more troubled than the iterator had
ever seen before. ‘What is it,
Garviel?’ he asked. ‘Something
has happened,’ Loken said.
1,9,46
‘Something so… so unthinkable
that I…’ He paused, and looked at
Jubal’s bound corpse. ‘I have to
make a report, but I don’t know
what to say. I have no frame of
reference. I’m glad you are here,
Kyril, you of all people. You have
steered me well over the years.’
‘I like to think that…’ ‘I
need your counsel now.’ Sindermann
stepped forward and placed his hand
on the giant warrior’s arm. ‘You
may trust me with any matter,
Garviel. I’m here to serve.’
Loken looked down at him. ‘This is
confidential. Utterly
confidential.’ ‘I understand.’
‘There have been deaths today. Six
1,9,47
brothers of Brakespur squad,
including Udon. Another barely
clinging to life. And Hellebore…
Hellebore has vanished, and I fear
they are dead too.’ ‘This can’t
be. The insurgents couldn’t
have–’ ‘They did nothing. This
is Xavyer Jubal,’ Loken said,
pointing towards the body on the
floor. ‘He killed the men,’ he
said simply. Sindermann rocked back
as if slapped. He blinked. ‘He
what? I’m sorry, Garviel, I thought
for a moment you said he–’ ‘He
killed the men. Jubal killed the men.
He took his bolter and his fists and
he killed six of Brakespur right in
front of my eyes, and he would have
1,9,48
killed me too, if I hadn’t run him
through.’ Sindermann felt his legs
tremble. He found a nearby rock and
sat down abruptly. ‘Terra,’ he
gasped. ‘Terror is right. Astartes
do not fight Astartes. Astartes do
not kill their own. It is against all
the rules of nature and man. It is
counter to the very gene-code the
Emperor fused into us when he wrought
us.’ ‘There must be some
mistake,’ Sindermann said. ‘No
mistake. I saw him do it. He was a
madman. He was possessed.’ ‘What?
Steady, now. You look to old terms,
Garviel. Possession is a spiritualist
word that–’ ‘He was possessed.
He claimed he was Samus.’ ‘Oh.’
1,9,49
‘You’ve heard the name, then?’
‘I’ve heard the whisper. That was
just enemy propaganda, wasn’t it?
We were told to dismiss it as scare
tactics.’ Loken touched the bruises
on his face, feeling the ache of
them. ‘So I thought. Iterator,
I’m going to ask you this once. Are
spirits real?’ ‘No, sir.
Absolutely not.’ ‘So we are
taught and thus we are liberated, but
could they exist? This world is lousy
with superstition and temple-fanes.
Could they exist here?’ ‘No,’
Sindermann replied more firmly.
‘There are no spirits, no daemons,
no ghosts in the dark edges of the
cosmos. Truth has shown us this.’
1,9,50
‘I’ve studied the archive,
Kyril,’ Loken replied. ‘Samus was
the name the people of this world
gave to their arch-fiend. He was
imprisoned in these mountains, so
their legends say.’ ‘Legends,
Garviel. Only legends. Myths. We have
learned much during our time amongst
the stars, and the most pertinent of
those things is that there is always
a rational explanation, even for the
most mysterious events.’ ‘An
Astartes draws his weapon and kills
his own, whilst claiming to be a
daemon from hell? Rationalise that,
sir.’ Sinderman rose. ‘Calm
yourself, Garviel, and I will.’
Loken didn’t reply. Sindermann
1,9,51
walked over to Jubal’s body and
stared at it. Jubal’s open, staring
eyes were rolled back in his skull
and utterly bloodshot. The flesh of
his face was drawn and shrivelled, as
if he had aged ten thousand years.
Strange patterns, like clusters of
blemishes or moles, were visible on
the painfully stretched skin.
‘These marks,’ said Sindermann.
‘These vile signs of wasting. Could
they be the traces of disease or
infection?’ ‘What?’ Loken
asked. ‘A virus, perhaps? A
reaction to toxicity? A plague?’
‘Astartes are resistant,’ Loken
said. ‘To most things, but not to
everything. I think this could be
1,9,52
some contagion. Something so virulent
that it destroyed Jubal’s mind
along with his body. Plagues can
drive men insane, and corrupt their
flesh.’ ‘Then why only him?’
asked Loken. Sindermann shrugged.
‘Perhaps some tiny flaw in his
gene-code?’ ‘But he behaved as if
possessed,’ Loken said, repeating
the word with brutal emphasis.
‘We’ve all been exposed to the
enemy’s propaganda. If Jubal’s
mind was deranged by fever, he might
simply have been repeating the words
he’d heard.’ Loken thought for a
moment. ‘You speak a lot of sense,
Kyril,’ he said. ‘Always.’ ‘A
plague,’ Loken nodded. ‘It’s a
1,9,53
sound explanation.’ ‘You’ve
suffered a tragedy today, Garviel,
but spirits and daemons played no
part in it. Now get to work. You need
to lock down this area in quarantine
and get a medicae task force here.
There may yet be further outbreaks.
NonAstartes, such as myself, might be
less resistant, and poor Jubal’s
corpse may yet be a vector for
disease.’ Sindermann looked back
down at the body. ‘Great Terra,’
he said. ‘He has been so ravaged. I
weep to see this waste.’ With a
creak of dried sinew, Jubal raised
his head and stared up at Sindermann
with blood-red eyes. ‘Look out,’
he wheezed. Euphrati Keeler had
1,9,54
stopped taking picts. She stowed away
her picter. The things they were
seeing in the narrow tunnels of the
fortress went beyond all decency to
record. She had never imagined that
human forms could be dismantled so
grievously, so totally. The stench of
blood in the close, cold air made her
gag, despite her rebreather. ‘I
want to go back now,’ Van Krasten
said. He was shaking and upset.
‘There is no music here. I am sick
to my stomach.’ Euphrati was
inclined to agree. ‘No,’ said
Borodin Flora in a muffled, steely
voice. ‘We must see it all. We are
chosen remembrancers. This is our
duty.’ Euphrati was quite sure
1,9,55
Flora was making an effort not to
throw up, but she warmed to the
sentiment. This was their duty. This
was the very reason they had been
summoned. To record and commemorate
the Crusade of Man. Whatever it
looked like. She tugged her picter
back out of its carry-bag and took a
few, tentative shots. Not of the
dead, for that would be indecent, but
of the blood on the walls, the smoke
fuming in the wind along the narrow
tunnels, the piles of scattered,
spent shell cases littering the
black-flecked ground.  Teams of army
troopers moved past them, lugging
bodies away for disposal. Some looked
at the three of them curiously.
1,9,56
‘Are you lost?’ one asked. ‘Not
at all. We’re allowed to be
here,’ Flora said. ‘Why would you
want to be?’ the man wondered.
Euphrati took a series of long shots
of troopers, almost in silhouette,
gathering up body parts at a tunnel
junction. It chilled her to see it,
and she hoped her picts would have
the same effect on her audience. ‘I
want to go back,’ Van Krasten said
again. ‘Don’t stray, or you’ll
get lost,’ Euphrati warned. ‘I
think I might be sick,’ Van Krasten
admitted. He was about to retch when
a shrill, harrowing scream echoed
down the tunnels. ‘What the hell
was that?’ Euphrati whispered.
1,9,57
Jubal rose. The ropes binding him
sheared and split, releasing his
arms. He screamed, and then screamed
again. His frantic wails soared and
echoed around the chamber. Sindermann
stumbled backwards in total panic.
Loken ran forward and tried to
restrain the reanimating madman.
Jubal struck out with one thrashing
fist and caught Loken in the chest.
Loken flew backwards into the pool
with a crash of water. Jubal turned,
hunched. Saliva dangled from his
slack mouth, and his bloodshot eyes
spun like compasses at true north.
‘Please, oh please…’ Sindermann
gabbled, backing away. ‘Look.
Out.’ The words crawled sluggishly
1,9,58
out of Jubal’s drooling mouth. He
lumbered forward. Something was
happening to him, something malign
and catastrophic. He was bulging,
expanding so furiously that his
armour began to crack and shatter.
Sections of broken plate split and
fell away from him, exposing thick
arms swollen with gangrene and
fibrous growths. His taut flesh was
pallid and blue. His face was
distorted, puffy and livid, and his
tongue flopped out of his rotting
mouth, long and serpentine. He raised
his meaty, distended hands
triumphantly, exposing finger-nails
grown into dark hooks and psoriatic
claws. ‘Samus is here,’ he
1,9,59
drawled.  Sindermann fell on his
knees before the misshapen brute.
Jubal reeked of corruption and sore
wounds. He shambled forward. His form
flickered and danced with blurry
yellow light, as if he was not quite
in phase with the present. A bolter
round struck him in the right
shoulder and detonated against the
rindy integument his skin had become.
Shreds of meat and gobbets of pus
sprayed in all directions. In the
chamber doorway, Nero Vipus took aim
again. The thing that had once been
Xavyer Jubal grabbed Sindermann and
threw him at Vipus. The pair of them
crashed backwards against the wall,
Vipus dropping his weapon in an
1,9,60
effort to catch and cushion
Sindermann and spare the frail bones
of the elderly iterator. The Jubal-
thing shuffled past them into the
tunnel, leaving a noxious trail of
dripped blood and wretched,
discoloured fluid in its wake.
Euphrati saw the thing coming for
them and tried to decide whether to
scream or raise her picter. In the
end, she did both. Van Krasten lost
control of his bodily functions, and
fell to the floor in a puddle of his
own manufacture. Borodin Flora just
backed away, his mouth moving
silently. The Jubal-thing advanced
down the tunnel towards them. It was
gross and distorted, its skin
1,9,61
stretched by humps and swellings. It
had become so gigantic that what
little remained of its pearl-white
armour dragged behind it like metal
rags. Strange puncta and moles marked
its flesh. Jubal’s face had
contorted into a dog snout, wherein
his human teeth stuck out like stray
ivory markers, displaced by the thin,
transparent crop of needle fangs that
now invested his mouth. There were so
many fangs that his mouth could no
longer close. His eyes were blood
pools. Jerky, spasmodic flashes of
yellow light surrounded him, making
vague shapes and patterns. They
caused Jubal’s movements to seem
wrong, as if he was a pict-feed
1,9,62
image, badly cut and running slightly
too fast. He snatched up Tolemew Van
Krasten and dashed him like a toy
against the walls of the tunnel, back
and forth, with huge, slamming,
splattering effect, so that when he
let go, little of Tolemew still
existed above the sternum. ‘Oh
Terra!’ Keeler cried, retching
violently. Borodin Flora stepped past
her  to confront the monster, and
made the defiant sign of the aquila.
‘Begone!’ he cried out.
‘Begone!’ The Jubal-thing leaned
forward, opened its mouth to a
hitherto unimaginable width,
revealing an unguessable number of
needle teeth, and bit off Borodin
1,9,63
Flora’s head and upper body. The
remainder of his form crumpled to the
floor, ejecting blood like a pressure
hose. Euphrati Keeler sank to her
knees. Terror had rendered her
powerless to run. She accepted her
fate, largely because she had no idea
what it was to be. In the final
moments of her life, she reassured
herself that at least she hadn’t
added to brutal death the indignity
of wetting herself in the face of
such incomprehensible horror.  
1,9,64
TEN

The Warmaster and his son No matter
the ferocity or ingenuity of the foe
Official denial ‘You killed it?’
‘Yes,’ said Loken, gazing at the
dirt floor, his mind somewhere else.
‘You’re sure?’ Loken looked up
out of his reverie. ‘What?’ ‘I
need you to be sure,’ Abaddon said.
‘You killed it?’ ‘Yes.’ Loken
was sitting on a crude hardwood stool
in one of the longhouses in Kasheri.
Night had fallen outside, bringing
with it a keening, malevolent wind
that shrieked around the gorge and
the Whisperhead peaks. A dozen oil
lamps lit the place with a feeble
1,10,1
ochre glow. ‘We killed it. Nero and
I together, with our bolters. It took
ninety rounds at full auto. It burst
and burned, and we used a flamer to
cremate all that remained.’ Abaddon
nodded. ‘How many people know?’
‘About that last act? Myself, Nero,
Sindermann and the remembrancer,
Keeler. We cut the thing down just
before it bit her in half. Everyone
else who saw it is dead.’ ‘What
have you said?’ ‘Nothing,
Ezekyle.’ ‘That’s good.’
‘I’ve said nothing because I
don’t know what to say.’ Abaddon
scooped up another stool and brought
it over to sit down facing Loken.
Both were in full plate, their helms
1,10,2
removed. Abaddon hunched his head low
to catch Loken’s eyes.  ‘I’m
proud of you, Garviel. You hear me?
You dealt with this well.’ ‘What
did I deal with?’ Loken asked
sombrely. ‘The situation. Tell me,
before Jubal rose again, who knew of
the murders?’ ‘More. Those of
Brakespur that survived. All of my
officers. I wanted their advice.’
‘I’ll speak to them,’ Abaddon
muttered. ‘This mustn’t get out.
Our line will be as you set it.
Victory, splendid but unexceptional.
The Tenth crushed the insurgents,
though losses were taken in two
squads. But that is war. We expect
casualties. The insurgents fought
1,10,3
bitterly and formidably to the last.
Hellebore and Brakespur bore the
brunt of their rage, but Sixty-Three
Nineteen is advanced to full
compliance. Glory the Tenth, and the
Luna Wolves, glory the Warmaster. The
rest will remain a matter of
confidence within the inner circle.
Can Sindermann be trusted to keep
this close?’ ‘Of course, though
he is very shaken.’ ‘And the
remembrancer? Keener, was it?’
‘Keeler. Euphrati Keeler. She’s
in shock. I don’t know her. I
don’t know what she’ll do, but
she has no idea what it was that
attacked her. I told her it was a
wild beast. She didn’t see Jubal…
1,10,4
change. She doesn’t know it was
him.’ ‘Well, that’s something.
I’ll place an injunction on her, if
necessary. Perhaps a word will be
sufficient. I’ll repeat the wild
beast story, and tell her we’re
keeping the matter confidential for
morale’s sake. The remembrancers
must be kept away from this.’
‘Two of them died.’ Abaddon got
up. ‘A tragic mishap during
deployment. A landing accident. They
knew the risks they were taking. It
will be just a footnote blemish to an
otherwise exemplary undertaking.’
Loken looked up at the first captain.
‘Are we trying to forget this even
happened, Ezekyle? For I cannot. And
1,10,5
I will not.’ ‘I’m saying this
is a military incident and will
remain restricted. It’s a matter of
security and morale, Garviel. You are
disturbed, I can see that plainly.
Think what needless trauma this would
cause if it got out. It would ruin
confidence, break the spirit of the
expedition, tarnish the entire
crusade, not to mention the
unimpeachable reputation of the
Legion.’ The longhouse door banged
open and the gale squealed in for a
moment  before the door closed again.
Loken didn’t look up. He was
expecting Vipus back at any time with
the muster reports. ‘Leave us,
Ezekyle,’ a voice said. It wasn’t
1,10,6
Vipus. Horus was not wearing his
armour. He was dressed in simple
foul-weather clothes, a mail shirt
and a cloak of furs. Abaddon bowed
his head and quickly left the
longhouse. Loken had risen to his
feet. ‘Sit, Garviel,’ Horus said
softly. ‘Sit down. Make no ceremony
to me.’ Loken slowly sat back down
and the Warmaster knelt beside him.
He was so immensely made that
kneeling, his head was on a level
with Loken’s. He plucked off his
black leather gloves and placed his
bare left hand on Loken’s shoulder.
‘I want you to let go of your
troubles, my son,’ he said. ‘I
try, sir, but they will not leave me
1,10,7
alone.’ Horus nodded. ‘I
understand.’ ‘I have made a
failure of this undertaking, sir,’
Loken said. ‘Ezekyle says we will
put a brave face on it for appearance
sake, but even if these events remain
secret, I will bear the shame of
failing you.’ ‘And how did you do
that?’ ‘Men died. A brother
turned upon his own. Such a manifest
sin. Such a crime. You charged me to
take this seat of resistance, and I
have made such a mess of it that you
have been forced to come here in
person to–’ ‘Hush,’ Horus
whispered. He reached out and unfixed
Loken’s tattered oath of moment
from his shoulder plate. ‘Do you,
1,10,8
Garviel Loken, accept your role in
this?’ The Warmaster read out.
‘Do you promise to lead your men
into the zone of war, and conduct
them to glory, no matter the ferocity
or ingenuity of the foe? Do you swear
to crush the insurgents of Sixty-
Three Nineteen, despite all they
might throw at you? Do you pledge to
do honour to the XVI Legion and the
Emperor?’ ‘Fine words,’ Loken
said. ‘They are indeed. I wrote
them. Well, did you, Garviel?’
‘Did I what, sir?’ ‘Did you
crush the insurgents of Sixty-Three
Nineteen, despite all they threw at
you?’ ‘Well, yes–’  ‘And
did you lead your men into the zone
1,10,9
of war, and conduct them to glory, no
matter the ferocity or ingenuity of
the foe?’ ‘Yes…’ ‘Then I
can’t see how you’ve failed in
any way, my son. Consider that last
phrase particularly. “No matter the
ferocity or ingenuity of the foe”.
When poor Jubal turned, did you give
up? Did you flee? Did you cast away
your courage? Or did you fight
against his insanity and his crime,
despite your wonder at it?’ ‘I
fought, sir,’ Loken said. ‘Throne
of Earth, yes, you did. Yes, you did,
Loken! You fought. Cast shame out. I
will not have it. You served me well
today, my son, and I am only sorry
that the extent of your service
1,10,10
cannot be more widely proclaimed.’
Loken started to reply, but fell
silent instead. Horus rose to his
feet and began to pace about the
room. He found a bottle of wine
amongst the clutter on a wall dresser
and poured himself a glass. ‘I
spoke to Kyril Sindermann,’ he
said, and took a sip of the wine. He
nodded to himself before continuing,
as if surprised at its quality.
‘Poor Kyril. Such a terrible thing
to endure. He’s even speaking of
spirits, you know? Sindermann, the
arch prophet of secular truth,
speaking of spirits. I put him right,
naturally. He mentioned spirits were
a concern of yours too.’ ‘Kyril
1,10,11
convinced me it was a plague, at
first, but I saw a spirit… a
daemon… take hold of Xavyer Jubal
and remake his flesh into the form of
a monster. I saw a daemon take hold
of Jubal’s soul and turn him
against his own kind.’ ‘No, you
didn’t,’ Horus said. ‘Sir?’
Horus smiled. ‘Allow me to
illuminate you. I’ll tell you what
you saw, Garviel. It is a secret
thing, known to a very few, though
the Emperor, beloved of all, knows
more than any of us. A secret,
Garviel, more than any other secret
we are keeping today. Can you keep
it? I’ll share it, for it will
soothe your mind, but I need you to
1,10,12
keep it solemnly.’ ‘I will,’
Loken said. The Warmaster took
another sip. ‘It was the warp,
Garviel.’ ‘The… warp?’ ‘Of
course it was. We know the power of
the warp and the chaos it contains.
We’ve seen it change men. We’ve
seen the wretched things that  infest
its dark dimensions. I know you have.
On Erridas. On Syrinx. On the bloody
coast of Tassilon. There are entities
in the warp that we might easily
mistake for daemons.’ ‘Sir,
I…’ Loken began. ‘I have been
trained in the study of the warp. I
am well-prepared to face its horrors.
I have fought the foul things that
pour forth from the gates of the
1,10,13
empyrean, and yes, the warp can seep
into a man and transmute him. I have
seen this happen, but only in
psykers. It is the risk they take.
Not in Astartes.’ ‘Do you
understand the full mechanism of the
warp, Garviel?’ Horus asked. He
raised the glass to the nearest light
to examine the colour of the wine.
‘No, sir. I don’t pretend to.’
‘Neither do I, my son. Neither does
the Emperor, beloved by all. Not
entirely. It pains me to admit that,
but it is the truth, and we deal in
truths above all else. The warp is a
vital tool to us, a means of
communication and transport. Without
it, there would be no Imperium of
1,10,14
Man, for there would be no quick
bridges between the stars. We use it,
and we harness it, but we have no
absolute control over it. It is a
wild thing that tolerates our
presence, but brooks no mastery.
There is power in the warp,
fundamental power, not good, nor
evil, but elemental and anathema to
us. It is a tool we use at our own
risk.’ The Warmaster finished his
glass and set it down. ‘Spirits.
Daemons. Those words imply a greater
power, a fiendish intellect and a
purpose. An evil archetype with
cosmic schemes and stratagems. They
imply a god, or gods, at work behind
the scenes. They imply the very
1,10,15
supernatural state that we have taken
great pains, through the light of
science, to shake off. They imply
sorcery and a palpable evil.’ He
looked across at Loken. ‘Spirits.
Daemons. The supernatural. Sorcery.
These are words we have allowed to
fall out of use, for we dislike the
connotations, but they are just
words. What you saw today… call it
a spirit. Call it a daemon. The words
serve well enough. Using them does
not deny the clinical truth of the
universe as man understands it. There
can be daemons in a secular cosmos,
Garviel. Just so long as we
understand the use of the word.’
‘Meaning the warp?’ ‘Meaning
1,10,16
the warp. Why coin new terms for its
horrors when we have a  bounty of old
words that might suit us just as
well? We use the words “alien”
and “xenos” to describe the
inhuman filth we encounter in some
locales. The creatures of the warp
are just “aliens” too, but they
are not life forms as we understand
the term. They are not organic. They
are extra-dimensional, and they
influence our reality in ways that
seem sorcerous to us. Supernatural,
if you will. So let’s use all those
lost words for them… daemons,
spirits, possessors, changelings. All
we need to remember is that there are
no gods out there, in the darkness,
1,10,17
no great daemons and ministers of
evil. There is no fundamental,
immutable evil in the cosmos. It is
too large and sterile for such
melodrama. There are simply inhuman
things that oppose us, things we were
created to battle and destroy. Orks.
Gykon. Tushepta. Keylekid. Eldar.
Jokaero… and the creatures of the
warp, which are stranger than all for
they exhibit powers that are bizarre
to us because of the otherness of
their nature.’ Loken rose to his
feet. He looked around the lamp-lit
room and heard the moaning of the
mountain wind outside. ‘I have seen
psykers taken by the warp, sir,’ he
said. ‘I have seen them change and
1,10,18
bloat in corruption, but I have never
seen a sound man taken. I have never
seen an Astartes so abused.’ ‘It
happens,’ Horus replied. He
grinned. ‘Does that shock you?
I’m sorry. We keep it quiet. The
warp can get into anything, if it so
pleases. Today was a particular
triumph for its ways. These mountains
are not haunted, as the myths report,
but the warp is close to the surface
here. That fact alone has given rise
to the myths. Men have always found
techniques to control the warp, and
the folk here have done precisely
that. They let the warp loose upon
you today, and brave Jubal paid the
price.’ ‘Why him?’ ‘Why not
1,10,19
him? He was angry at you for
overlooking him, and his anger made
him vulnerable. The tendrils of the
warp are always eager to exploit such
chinks in the mind. I imagine the
insurgents hoped that scores of your
men would fall under the power they
had let loose, but Tenth Company had
more resolve than that. Samus was
just a voice from the Chaotic realm
that briefly anchored itself to
Jubal’s flesh. You dealt with it
well. It could have been far
worse.’ ‘You’re sure of this,
sir?’ Horus grinned again. The
sight of that grin filled Loken with
sudden warmth. ‘Ing Mae Sing,
Mistress of Astropaths, informed me
1,10,20
of a rapid warp spike in this region
just after you disembarked. The data
is solid and  substantive. The locals
used their limited know-ledge of the
warp, which they probably understood
as magic, to unleash the horror of
the empyrean upon you as a weapon.’
‘Why have we been told so little
about the warp, sir?’ Loken asked.
He looked directly into Horus’s
wide-set eyes as he asked the
question. ‘Because so little is
known,’ the Warmaster replied.
‘Do you know why I am Warmaster, my
son?’ ‘Because you are the most
worthy, sir?’ Horus laughed and,
pouring another glass of wine, shook
his head. ‘I am Warmaster, Garviel,
1,10,21
because the Emperor is busy. He has
not retired to Terra because he is
weary of the crusade. He has gone
there because he has more important
work to do.’ ‘More important than
the crusade?’ Loken asked. Horus
nodded. ‘So he said to me. After
Ullanor, he believed the time had
come when he could leave the
crusading work in the hands of the
primarchs so that he might be freed
to undertake a still higher
calling.’ ‘Which is?’ Loken
waited for an answer, expecting some
transcendent truth. What the
Warmaster said was, ‘I don’t
know. He didn’t tell me. He
hasn’t told anyone.’ Horus
1,10,22
paused. For what seemed like an age,
the wind banged against the longhouse
shutters. ‘Not even me,’ Horus
whispered. Loken sensed a terrible
hurt in his commander, a wounded
pride that he, even he, had not been
worthy enough to know this secret. In
a second, the Warmaster was smiling
at Loken again, his dark mood
forgotten. ‘He didn’t want to
burden me,’ he said briskly, ‘but
I’m not a fool. I can speculate. As
I said, the Imperium would not exist
but for the warp. We are obliged to
use it, but we know perilously little
about it. I believe that I am
Warmaster because the Emperor is
occupied in unlocking its secrets. He
1,10,23
has committed his great mind to the
ultimate mastery of the warp, for the
good of mankind. He has realised that
without final and full understanding
of the immaterium, we will founder
and fall, no matter how many worlds
we conquer.’ ‘What if he
fails?’ Loken asked. ‘He
won’t,’ the Warmaster replied
bluntly. ‘What if we fail?’
‘We won’t,’ Horus said,
‘because we are his true servants
and sons. Because we cannot fail
him.’ He looked at his half-drunk
glass and put it aside. ‘I came
here looking for spirits,’ he
joked, ‘and all I find is wine.
There’s a lesson for you.’
1,10,24
Trudging, unspeaking, the warriors of
Tenth Company clambered from the
cooling Stormbirds and streamed away
across the embarkation deck towards
their barracks. There was no sound
save for the clink of their armour
and the clank of their feet. In their
midst, brothers carried the biers on
which the dead of Brakespur lay,
shrouded in Legion banners. Four of
them carried Flora and Van Krasten
too, though no formal flags draped
the coffins of the dead
remembrancers. The Bell of Return
rang out across the vast deck. The
men made the sign of the aquila and
pulled off their helms. Loken
wandered away towards his arming
1,10,25
chamber, calling for the service of
his artificers. He carried his left
shoulder guard in his hands,
Jubal’s sword still stuck fast
through it. Entering the chamber, he
was about to hurl the miserable
memento away into a corner, but he
pulled up short, realising he was not
alone. Mersadie Oliton stood in the
shadows. ‘Mistress,’ he said,
setting the broken guard down.
‘Captain, I’m sorry. I didn’t
mean to intrude. Your equerry let me
wait here, knowing you were about to
return. I wanted to see you. I wanted
to apologise.’ ‘For what?’
Loken asked, hooking his battered
helm on the top strut of his armour
1,10,26
rack. She stepped forward, the light
glowing off her black skin and her
long, augmented cranium. ‘For
missing the opportunity you gave me.
You were kind enough to suggest me as
a candidate to accompany the
undertaking, and I did not attend in
time.’ ‘Be grateful for that,’
he said. She frowned. ‘I… there
was a problem, you see. A friend of
mine, a fellow remembrancer. The poet
Ignace Karkasy. He finds himself in a
deal of trouble, and I was taken up
trying to assist him. It so detained
me, I missed the appointment.’
‘You didn’t miss anything,
mistress,’ Loken said as he began
to strip off his armour. ‘I would
1,10,27
like to speak with you about
Ignace’s plight. I hesitate to ask,
but I believe someone of your
influence might help him.’ ‘I’m
listening,’ Loken said. ‘So am I,
sir,’ Mersadie said. She stepped
forward and placed a tiny hand on his
arm to restrain him slightly. He had
been throwing off his armour with
such vigorous, angry motions. ‘I am
a remembrancer, sir,’ she said.
‘Your remembrancer, if it is not
too bold to say so. Do you want to
tell me what happened on the surface?
Is there any memory you would like to
share with me?’ Loken looked down
at her. His eyes were the colour of
rain. He pulled away from her touch.
1,10,28
‘No,’ he said.  
1,0,29
ONE
 Loathe and
love This world is Murder A hunger
for glory Even after he’d slain a
fair number of them, Saul Tarvitz was
still unable to say with any
certainty where the biology of the
megarachnid stopped and their
technology began. They were the most
seamless things, a perfect fusion of
artifice and organism. They did not
wear their armour or carry their
weapons. Their armour was an
integument bonded to their arthropod
shells, and they possessed weapons as
naturally as a man might own fingers
or a mouth. Tarvitz loathed them, and
loved them too. He loathed them for
2,1,1
their abominable want of human
perfection. He loved them because
they were genuinely testing foes, and
in mastering them, the Emperor’s
Children would take another stride
closer to attaining their full
potential. ‘We always need a
rival,’ his lord Eidolon had once
said, and the words had stuck forever
in Tarvitz’s mind, ‘a true rival,
of considerable strength and
fortitude. Only against such a rival
can our prowess be properly
measured.’ There was more at stake
here than the Legion’s prowess,
however, and Tarvitz understood that
solemnly. Brother Astartes were in
trouble, and this was a mission –
2,1,2
though no one had dared actually use
the term – of rescue. It was
thoroughly improper to openly suggest
that the Blood Angels needed
rescuing. . That was the word they
had been told to use, but it was
Reinforcement hard to reinforce what
you could not find. They had been on
the surface of Murder for sixty-six
hours, and had found no sign of the
140th Expedition  forces. Or even,
for the most part, of each other.
Lord Commander Eidolon had committed
the entire company to the surface
drop. The descent had been foul,
worse than the warnings they had been
given prior to the drop, and the
warnings had been grim enough.
2,1,3
Nightmarish atmospherics had
scattered their drop pods like chaff,
casting them wildly astray from their
projected landing vectors. Tarvitz
knew it was likely many pods hadn’t
even made it to the ground intact. He
found himself one of two captains in
charge of just over thirty men,
around one-third of the company
force, and all that had been able to
regroup after planetfall. Due to the
stormcover, they couldn’t raise the
fleet in orbit, nor could they raise
Eidolon or any other part of the
landing force. Presuming Eidolon and
any other part of the landing force
had survived. The whole situation
smacked of abject failure, and
2,1,4
failure was not a concept the
Emperor’s Children cared to
entertain. To turn failure into
something else, there was little
choice but to get on with the remit
of the undertaking, so they spread
out in a search pattern to find the
brothers they had come to help. On
the way, perhaps, they might reunite
with other elements of their
scattered force, or even find some
geographical frame of reference. The
dropsite environs was disconcerting.
Under an enamel-white sky, fizzling
and blemished by the megarachnid
shield-storms, the land was an
undulating plain of ferrous red dust
from which a sea of gigantic grass
2,1,5
stalks grew, grey-white like dirty
ice. Each stalk, as thick as a
man’s plated thigh, rose up
straight to a height of twenty
metres: tough, dry and bristly. They
swished gently in the radio-active
wind, but such was their size, at
ground level, the air was filled with
the creaking, moaning sound of their
structures in motion. The Astartes
moved through the groaning forest of
stalks like lice in a wheatfield.
There was precious little lateral
visibility. High above their heads,
the nodding vertical shoots soared
upwards and pointed incriminatingly
at the curdled glare of the sky.
Around them, the stalks had grown so
2,1,6
close together that a man could see
only a few metres in any direction.
The bases of most of the grass stalks
were thick with swollen, black
larvae: sack-things the size of a
man’s head, clustered tumorously to
the metre or so of stalk closest to
the ground. The larvae did nothing
but cling and,  presumably, drink. As
they did so, they made a weird
hissing, whistling noise that added
to the eerie acoustics of the forest
floor. Bulle had suggested that the
larvae might be infant forms of the
enemy, and for the first few hours,
they had systematically destroyed all
they’d found with flamers and
blades, but the work was wearying and
2,1,7
unending. There were larvae
everywhere, and eventually they had
chosen to forget it and ignore the
hissing sacks. Besides, the foetid
ichor that burst from the larvae when
they were struck was damaging the
edges of their weapons and scarring
their armour where it splashed.
Lucius, Tarvitz’s fellow captain,
had found the first tree, and called
them all close to inspect it. It was
a curious thing, apparently made of a
calcified white stone, and it dwarfed
the surrounding sea of stalks. It was
shaped like a wide-capped mushroom: a
fifty-metre dome supported on a
thick, squat trunk ten metres broad.
The dome was an intricate hemisphere
2,1,8
of sharp, bone-white thorns, tangled
and sharply pointed, the barbs some
two or three metres in length.
‘What is it for?’ Tarvitz
wondered. ‘It’s not for
anything,’ Lucius replied.
‘It’s a tree. It has no
purpose.’ In that, Lucius was
wrong. Lucius was younger than
Tarvitz, though they were both old
enough to have seen many wonders in
their lives. They were friends,
except that the balance of their
friendship was steeply and invisibly
weighted in one direction. Saul and
Lucius represented the bi-polar
aspect of their Legion. Like all of
the Emperor’s Children, they
2,1,9
devoted themselves to the pursuit of
martial perfection, but Saul was
diligently grounded where Lucius was
ambitious. Saul Tarvitz had long
since realised that Lucius would one
day outstrip him in honour and rank.
Lucius would perhaps become a lord
commander in due course, part of the
aloof inner circle at the Legion’s
traditionally hierarchical core.
Tarvitz didn’t care. He was a file
officer, born to the line, and had no
desire for elevation. He was content
to glorify the primarch and the
Emperor, beloved of all, by knowing
his place, and keeping it with
unstinting devotion. Lucius mocked
him playfully sometimes, claiming
2,1,10
Tarvitz courted the common ranks
because he couldn’t win the respect
of the officers. Tarvitz always
laughed that off, because he knew
Lucius didn’t properly understand.
Saul Tarvitz followed the code
exactly, and took pride in that. He
knew his  perfect destiny was as a
file officer. To crave more would
have been overweening and imperfect.
Tarvitz had standards, and despised
anyone who cast their own standards
aside in the hunt for inappropriate
goals. It was all about purity, not
superiority. That’s what the other
Legions always failed to understand.
Barely fifteen minutes after the
discovery of the tree – the first
2,1,11
of many they would find scattered
throughout the creaking grasslands
– they had their first dealings
with the megarachnid. The enemy’s
arrival had been announced by three
signs: the larvae nearby had suddenly
stopped hissing; the towering grass
stalks had begun an abrupt shivering
vibration, as if electrified; then
the Astartes had heard a strange,
chittering noise, coming closer.
Tarvitz barely saw the enemy warriors
during that first clash. They had
come, thrilling and clattering, out
of the grass forest, moving so fast
they were silver blurs. The fight
lasted twelve chaotic seconds, a
period filled to capacity with
2,1,12
gunshots and shouts, and odd, weighty
impacts. Then the enemy had vanished
again, as fast as they had come, the
stalks had stilled, and the larvae
had resumed their hissing. ‘Did you
see them?’ asked Kercort, reloading
his bolter. ‘I saw something…’
Tarvitz admitted, doing the same.
‘Durellen’s dead. So is
Martius,’ Lucius announced
casually, approaching them with
something in his hand. Tarvitz
couldn’t quite believe what he had
been told. ‘They’re dead? Just…
dead?’ he asked Lucius. The fight
surely hadn’t lasted long enough to
have included the passing of two
veteran Astartes. ‘Dead,’ nodded
2,1,13
Lucius. ‘You can look upon their
cadavers if you wish. They’re over
there. They were too slow.’ Weapon
raised, Tarvitz pushed through the
swaying stalks, some of them broken
and snapped over by frantic bolter
fire. He saw the two bodies, tangled
amid fallen white shoots on the red
earth, their beautiful purple and
gold armour sawn apart and running
with blood. Dismayed, he looked away
from the butchery. ‘Find Varras,’
he told Kercort, and the man went off
to locate the Apothecary. ‘Did we
kill anything?’ Bulle asked. ‘I
hit something,’ Lucius said
proudly, ‘but I cannot find the
body. It left this behind.’ He held
2,1,14
out the thing in his hand.  It was a
limb, or part of a limb. Long,
slender, hard. The main part of it, a
metre long, was a gently curved
blade, apparently made of brushed
zinc or galvanised iron. It came to
an astonishingly sharp point. It was
thin, no thicker than a grown man’s
wrist. The long blade ended in a
widening joint, which attached it to
a thicker limb section. This part was
also armoured with mottled grey
metal, but came to an abrupt end
where Lucius’s shot had blown it
off. The broken end, in cross-
section, revealed a skin of metal
surrounding a sleeve of natural,
arthropoid chitin around an inner
2,1,15
mass of pink, wet meat. ‘Is it an
arm?’ Bulle asked. ‘It’s a
sword,’ Katz corrected. ‘A sword
with a joint?’ Bulle snorted.
‘And meat inside?’ Lucius grasped
the limb, just above the joint, and
brandished it like a sabre. He swung
it at the nearest stalk, and it went
clean through. With a lingering
crash, the massive dry shoot toppled
over, tearing into others as it fell.
Lucius started laughing, then he
cried out in pain and dropped the
limb. Even the base part of the limb,
above the joint, had an edge, and it
was so sharp that the force of his
grip had bitten through his gauntlet.
‘It has cut me,’ Lucius
2,1,16
complained, poking at his ruptured
glove. Tarvitz looked down at the
limb, bent and still on the red soil.
‘Little wonder they can slice us to
ribbons.’ Half an hour later, when
the stalks shivered again, Tarvitz
met his first megarachnid face to
face. He killed it, but it was a
close-run thing, over in a couple of
seconds. From that encounter, Saul
Tarvitz began to understand why
Khitas Frome had named the world
Murder. The great warship exploded
like a breaching whale from the
smudge of unlight that was its
retranslation point, and returned to
the silent, physical cosmos of real
space again with a shivering impact.
2,1,17
It had translated twelve weeks
earlier, by the ship-board clocks,
and had made a journey that ought to
have taken eighteen weeks. Great
powers had been put into play to
expedite the transit, powers that
only a Warmaster could call upon. It
coasted for about six million
kilometres, trailing the last,
luminous tendrils of plasmic flare
from its immense bulk, like remorae,
until strobing flashes of un-light to
stern announced the belated arrival
of its consorts: ten  light cruisers
and five mass conveyance troop ships.
The stragglers lit their real space
engines and hurried wearily to join
formation with the huge flagship. As
2,1,18
they approached, like a school of
pups swimming close to their mighty
parent, the flagship ignited its own
drives and led them in. Towards One
Forty Twenty. Towards Murder. Forward
arrayed detectors pinged as they
tasted the magnetic and energetic
profiles of other ships at high
anchor around the system’s fourth
planet, eighty million kilometres
ahead. The local sun was yellow and
hot, and billowed with loud, charged
particles. As it advanced at the head
of the trailing flotilla, the
flagship broadcast its standard
greeting document, in vox, vox-
supplemented pict, War Council code,
and astrotelepathic forms. ‘This is
2,1,19
the Vengeful Spirit , of the 63rd
Expedition. This vessel approaches
with peaceful intent, as an
ambassador of the Imperium of Man.
House your guns and stand to. Make
acknowledgement.’ On the bridge of
the Vengeful Spirit , Master Comnenus
sat at his station and waited. Given
its great size and number of
personnel, the bridge around him was
curiously quiet. There was just a
murmur of low voices and the whir of
instrumentation. The ship itself was
protesting loudly. Undignified creaks
and seismic moans issued from its
immense hull and layered decks as the
superstructure relaxed and settled
from the horrendous torsion stresses
2,1,20
of warp translation. Boas Comnenus
knew most of the sounds like old
friends, and could almost anticipate
them. He’d been part of the ship
for a long time, and knew it as
intimately as a lover’s body. He
waited, braced, for erroneous creaks,
for the sudden chime of defect
alarms. So far, all was well. He
glanced at the Master Companion of
Vox, who shook his head. He switched
his gaze to Ing Mae Sing who, though
blind, knew full well he was looking
at her. ‘No response, master,’
she said. ‘Repeat,’ he ordered.
He wanted that signal response, but
more particularly, he was waiting for
the fix. It was taking too long.
2,1,21
Comnenus drummed his steel fingers on
the edge of his master console, and
deck officers all around him
stiffened. They knew, and feared,
that sign of impatience. Finally, an
adjutant hurried over from the
navigation pit with the wafer slip.
The adjutant might have been about to
apologise for the delay, but Comnenus
glanced up at him with a whir of
augmetic lenses. The whir said, ‘I
do not expect you to speak.’ The
adjutant simply held the wafer out
for inspection. Comnenus read it,
nodded, and handed it back. ‘Make
it known and recorded,’ he said.
The adjutant paused long enough for
another deck officer to copy the
2,1,22
wafer for the principal transit log,
then hurried up the rear staircase of
the bridge to the strategium deck.
There, with a salute, he handed it to
the duty master, who took it, turned,
and walked twenty paces to the plated
glass doors of the sanctum, where he
handed it in turn to the master
bodyguard. The master bodyguard, a
massive Astartes in gold custodes
armour, read the wafer quickly,
nodded, and opened the doors. He
passed the wafer to the solemn, robed
figure of Maloghurst, who was waiting
just inside. Maloghurst read the
wafer too, nodded in turn, and shut
the doors again. ‘Location is
confirmed and entered into the
2,1,23
log,’ Maloghurst announced to the
sanctum. ‘One Forty Twenty.’
Seated in a high-backed chair that
had been drawn up close to the window
ports to afford a better view of the
starfield outside, the Warmaster took
a deep, steady breath.
‘Determination of passage so
noted,’ he replied. ‘Let my
acknowledgement be a matter of
record.’ The twenty waiting scribes
around him scratched the details down
in their manifests, bowed and
withdrew. ‘Maloghurst?’ The
Warmaster turned his head to look at
his equerry. ‘Send Boas my
compliments, please.’ ‘Yes,
lord.’ The Warmaster rose to his
2,1,24
feet. He was dressed in full
ceremonial wargear, gleaming gold and
frost white, with a vast mantle of
purple scale-skin draped across his
shoulders. The eye of Terra stared
from his breastplate. He turned to
face the ten Astartes officers
gathered in the centre of the room,
and each one of them felt that the
eye was regarding him with
particular, unblinking scrutiny.
‘We await your orders, lord,’
said Abaddon. Like the other nine, he
was wearing battle plate with a
floor-length cloak, his crested helm
carried in the crook of his left arm.
‘And we’re where we’re supposed
to be,’ said Torgaddon, ‘and
2,1,25
alive, which is always a good
start.’ A broad smile crossed the
Warmaster’s face. ‘Indeed it is,
Tarik.’ He looked into the eyes of
each officer in turn. ‘My friends,
it seems we have an  alien war to
contest. This pleases me. Proud as I
am of our accomplishments on Sixty-
Three Nineteen, that was a painful
fight to prosecute. I can’t derive
satisfaction from a victory over our
own kind, no matter how wrong-headed
and stubborn their philosophies. It
limits the soldier in me, and
inhibits my relish of war, and we are
all warriors, you and I. Made for
combat. Bred, trained and
disciplined. Except you pair,’
2,1,26
Horus smirked, nodding at Abaddon and
Luc Sedirae. ‘You kill until I have
to tell you to stop.’ ‘And even
then you have to raise your voice,’
added Torgaddon. Most of them
laughed. ‘So an alien war is a
delight to me,’ the Warmaster
continued, still smiling. ‘A clear
and simple foe. An opportunity to
wage war without restraint, regret or
remorse. Let us go and be warriors
for a while, pure and undiluted.’
‘Hear, hear!’ cried the ancient
Iacton Qruze, businesslike and sober,
clearly bothered by Torgaddon’s
constant levity. The other nine were
more modest in their assent. Horus
led them out of the sanctum onto the
2,1,27
strategium deck, the four captains of
the Mournival and the company
commanders: Sedirae of the
Thirteenth, Qruze of the Third,
Targost of the Seventh, Marr of the
Eighteenth, Moy of the Nineteenth,
and Goshen of the Twenty-Fifth.
‘Let’s have tactical,’ the
Warmaster said. Maloghurst was
waiting, ready. As he motioned with
his control wand, detailed hololithic
images shimmered into place above the
dais. They showed a general profile
of the system, with orbital paths
delineated, and the position and
motion of tracked vessels. Horus
gazed up at the hololithic graphics
and reached out. Actuator sensors
2,1,28
built into the fingertips of his
gauntlets allowed him to rotate the
hololithic display and bring certain
segments into magnification.
‘Twenty-nine craft,’ he said.
‘I thought the 140th was eighteen
vessels strong?’ ‘So we were
told, lord,’ Maloghurst replied. As
soon as they had stepped out of the
sanctum, they had started conversing
in Cthonic, so as to preserve
tactical confidence whilst in earshot
of the bridge personnel. Though Horus
had not been raised on Cthonia –
uncommonly, for a primarch, he had
not matured on the cradle-world of
his Legion – he spoke it fluently.
In fact, he spoke it with the
2,1,29
particular hard palatal edge and
rough vowels of a Western Hemispheric
ganger, the commonest and roughest of
Cthonia’s feral castes. It had
always amused Loken to hear that
accent. Early on, he had assumed it
was because that’s how the
Warmaster had learned it, from just
such a speaker, but he doubted that
now. Horus never did anything by
accident. Loken believed that the
Warmaster’s rough Cthonic accent
was a deliberate affectation so that
he would seem, to the men, as honest
and low-born as any of them.
Maloghurst had consulted a data-slate
provided by a waiting deck officer.
‘I confirm the 140th Expedition was
2,1,30
given a complement of eighteen
vessels.’ ‘Then what are these
others?’ asked Aximand. ‘Enemy
ships?’ ‘We’re awaiting sensor
profile analysis, captain,’
Maloghurst replied, ‘and there has
been no response to our signals as
yet.’ ‘Tell Master Comnenus to
be… more emphatic,’ the Warmaster
told his equerry. ‘Should I
instruct him to form our components
into a battle line, lord?’
Maloghurst asked. ‘I’ll consider
it,’ the Warmaster said. Maloghurst
limped away down the platform steps
onto the main bridge to speak to Boas
Comnenus. ‘Should we form a battle
line?’ Horus asked his commanders.
2,1,31
‘Could the additional profiles be
alien vessels?’ Qruze wondered.
‘It doesn’t look like a battle
spread, Iacton,’ Aximand replied,
‘and Frome said nothing about enemy
vessels.’ ‘They’re ours,’
said Loken. The Warmaster looked over
at him. ‘You think so, Garviel?’
‘It seems evident to me, sir. The
hits show a spread of ships at high
anchor. Imperial anchorage formation.
Others must have responded to the
call for assistance…’ Loken
trailed off, and suddenly fought back
an embarrassed smile. ‘You knew
that all along, of course, my
lord.’ ‘I was just wondering who
else might have been sharp enough to
2,1,32
recognise the pattern,’ Horus
smiled. Qruze shook his head with a
grin, sheepish at his own mistake.
The Warmaster nodded towards the
display. ‘So, what’s this big
fellow here? That’s a barge.’
‘The Misericord ?’ suggested
Qruze. ‘No, no, that’sthe
Misericord . And what’s
thisabout?’ Horus leaned forwards,
and ran his fingers across the hard
light display. ‘It looks like…
music. Something like music. Who’s
transmitting music?’  ‘Outstation
relays,’ Abaddon said, studying his
own data-slate. ‘Beacons. The 140th
reported thirty beacons in the system
grid. Xenos. Their broadcasts are
2,1,33
repeating and untranslatable.’
‘Really? They have no ships, but
they have outstation beacons?’
Horus reached out and changed the
display to a close breakdown of
scatter patterns. ‘This is
untranslatable?’ ‘So the 140th
said,’ said Abaddon. ‘Have we
taken their word for that?’ asked
the Warmaster. ‘I imagine we
have,’ said Abaddon. ‘There’s
sense in this,’ Horus decided,
peering at the luminous graphics.
‘I want this run. I want us to run
it. Start with standard numeric
blocks. With respect to the 140th, I
don’t intend to take their word for
anything. Cursed awful job they’ve
2,1,34
done here so far.’ Abaddon nodded,
and stepped aside to speak to one of
the waiting deck officers and have
the order enacted. ‘You said it
looks like music,’ Loken said.
‘What?’ ‘You said it looks like
music, sir,’ Loken repeated. ‘An
interesting word to choose.’ The
Warmaster shrugged. ‘It’s
mathematical, but there’s a
sequential rhythm to it. It’s not
random. Music and maths, Garviel. Two
sides of a coin. This is deliberately
structured. Lord knows which idiot in
the 140th Fleet decided this was
untranslatable.’ Loken nodded.
‘You see that, just by looking at
it?’ he asked. ‘Isn’t it
2,1,35
obvious?’ Horus replied. Maloghurst
returned. ‘Master Comnenus confirms
all contacts are Imperial,’ he
said, holding out another wafer slip
of print out. ‘Other units have
been arriving these last few weeks,
in response to the calls for aid.
Most of them are Imperial army
conveyances en route to Carollis
Star, but the big vessel is the
Proudheart . Third Legion, the
Emperor’s Children. A full company,
under the command privilege of Lord
Commander Eidolon.’ ‘So, they
beat us to it. How are they doing?’
Maloghurst shrugged. ‘It would
seem… not well, lord,’ he said.
The planet’s official designation
2,1,36
in the Imperial Registry was One
Hundred  and Forty Twenty, it being
the twentieth world subjected to
compliance by the fleet of the 140th
Expedition. But that was inaccurate,
as clearly the 140th had not achieved
anything like compliance. Still, the
Emperor’s Children had used the
number to begin with, for to do
otherwise would have been an insult
to the honour of the Blood Angels.
Prior to arrival, Lord Commander
Eidolon had briefed his Astartes
comprehensively. The initial
transmissions of the 140th Expedition
had been clear and succinct. Khitas
Frome, captain of the three Blood
Angels companies that formed the
2,1,37
marrow of the 140th, had reported
xenos hostilities a few days after
his forces had touched down on the
world’s surface. He had described
‘very capable things, like upright
beetles, but made of, or shod in,
metal. Each one is twice the height
of a man and very belligerent.
Assistance may be required if their
numbers increase.’ After that, his
relayed communiqués had been
somewhat patchy and intermittent.
Fighting had ‘grown thicker and
more savage’ and the xenos forms
‘appeared not to lack in
numbers’. A week later, and his
transmissions were more urgent.
‘There is a race here that resists
2,1,38
us, and which we cannot easily
overcome. They refuse to admit
communication with us, or any parlay.
They spill from their lairs. I find
myself admiring their mettle, though
they are not made as we are. Their
martial schooling is fine indeed. A
worthy foe, one that might be written
about in our annals.’ A week after
that, the expedition’s messages had
become rather more simple, sent by
the Master of the Fleet instead of
Frome. ‘The enemy here is
formidable, and quite outweighs us.
To take this world, the full force of
the Legio is required. We humbly
submit a request for reinforcement at
this time.’ Frome’s last message,
2,1,39
relayed from the surface a fortnight
later by the expedition fleet, had
been a tinny rasp of generally
indecipherable noise. All the
articulacy and purpose of his words
had been torn apart by the feral
distortion. The only cogent thing
that had come through was his final
utterance. Each word had seemed to be
spoken with inhuman effort. ‘This.
World. Is. Murder.’ And so they had
named it. The task force of the
Emperor’s Children was
comparatively small in size: just a
company of the Legion’s main
strength, conveyed by the battle-
barge , under the command of Lord
Eidolon. After a brief,
2,1,40
peaceProudheart  keeping tour of
newly compliant worlds in the Satyr
Lanxus Belt, they had been en route
to rejoin their primarch and brethren
companies at Carollis Star to begin a
mass advance into the Lesser Bifold
Cluster. However, during their
transit, the 140th Expedition had
begun its requests for assistance.
The task force had been the closest
Imperial unit fit to respond. Lord
Eidolon had requested immediate
permission from his primarch to alter
course and go to the expedition’s
aid. Fulgrim had given his authority
at once. The Emperor’s Children
would never leave their Astartes
brothers in jeopardy. Eidolon had
2,1,41
been given his primarch’s instant,
unreserved blessing to reroute and
support the beleaguered expedition.
Other forces were rushing to assist.
It was said a detachment of Blood
Angels was on its way, as was a
heavyweight response from the
Warmaster himself, despatched from
the 63rd Expedition. At best, the
closest of them was still many days
off. Lord Eidolon’s task force was
the interim measure: critical
response, the first to the scene.
Eidolon’s battle-barge had joined
with the operational vessels of the
140th Expedition at high anchor above
One Forty Twenty. The 140th
Expedition was a small, compact force
2,1,42
of eighteen carriers, mass
conveyances and escorts supporting
the noble battle-barge Misericord .
Its martial composition was three
companies of Blood Angels under
Captain Frome, and four thousand men
of the Imperial army, with allied
armour, but no Mechanicum force.
Mathanual August, Master of the 140th
Fleet, had welcomed Eidolon and his
commanders aboard the barge. Tall and
slender, with a forked white beard,
August was fretful and nervous. ‘I
am gratified at your quick response,
lord,’ he’d told Eidolon.
‘Where is Frome?’ Eidolon had
asked bluntly. August had shrugged,
helplessly. ‘Where is the commander
2,1,43
of the army divisions?’ A second
pitiful shrug. ‘They are all down
there.’ Down there. On Murder. The
world was a hazy, grey orb, mottled
with storm patterning in the
atmosphere. Drawn to the lonely
system by the curious, untranslatable
broadcasts of the outstation beacons,
a clear and manifest trace of
sentient life, the 140th Expedition
had focussed its attentions on the
fourth planet, the only orb in the
star’s orbit with an atmosphere.
Sensor sweeps had detected abundant
vital traces, though  nothing had
answered their signals. Fifty Blood
Angels had dropped first, in landers,
and had simply disappeared.
2,1,44
Previously calm weather cycles had
mutated into violent tempests the
moment the landers had entered the
atmosphere, like an allergic
reaction, and swallowed them up. Due
to the suddenly volatile climate,
communication with the surface was
impossible. Another fifty had
followed, and had similarly vanished.
That was when Frome and the fleet
officers had begun to suspect that
the life forms of One Forty Twenty
somehow commanded their own weather
systems as a defence. The immense
storm fronts, later dubbed
‘shieldstorms’, that had risen up
to meet the surface-bound landers,
had probably obliterated them. After
2,1,45
that, Frome had used drop pods, the
only vehicles that seemed to survive
the descent. Frome had led the third
wave himself, and only partial
messages had been received from him
subsequently, even though he’d
taken an astrotelepath with him to
counter the climatic vox-
interference. It was a grim story.
Section by section, August had
committed the Astartes and army
forces in his expedition to surface
drops in a vain attempt to respond to
Frome’s broken pleas for support.
They had either been destroyed by the
storms or lost in the impenetrable
maelstrom below. The shieldstorms,
once roused, would not die away.
2,1,46
There were no clean surface picts, no
decent topographic scans, no uplinks
or viable communication lines. One
Forty Twenty was an abyss from which
no one returned. ‘We’ll be going
in blind,’ Eidolon had told his
officers. ‘Drop pod descent.’
‘Perhaps you should wait, lord,’
August had suggested. ‘We have word
that a Blood Angels force is en route
to relieve Captain Frome, and the
Luna Wolves are but four days away.
Combined, perhaps, you might
better–’ That had decided it.
Tarvitz knew Lord Eidolon had no
intention of sharing any glory with
the Warmaster’s elite. His lord was
relishing the prospect of
2,1,47
demonstrating the excellence of his
company, by rescuing the cohorts of a
rival Legion… whether the word
‘rescuing’ was used or not. The
nature of the deed, and the
comparisons that it made, would speak
for themselves. Eidolon had
sanctioned the drop immediately.  
2,1,48
TWO

The nature of the enemy A trace The
purpose of trees The megarachnid
warriors were three metres tall, and
possessed eight limbs. They
ambulated, with dazzling speed, on
their four hindmost limbs, and used
the other four as weapons. Their
bodies, one third again as weighty
and massive as a human’s, were
segmented like an insect’s: a
small, compact abdomen hung between
the four, wide-spread, slender
walking limbs; a massive, armoured
thorax from which all eight limbs
depended; and a squat, wide, wedge-
shaped head, equipped with short,
2,2,1
rattling mouthparts that issued the
characteristic chittering noise, a
heavy, ctenoid comb of brow armour,
and no discernible eyes. The four
upper limbs matched the trophy Lucius
had taken in the first round: metal-
cased blades over a metre in length
beyond the joint. Every part of the
megarachnid appeared to be thickly
plated with mottled, almost fibrous
grey armour, except the head crests,
which seemed to be natural, chitinous
growths, rough, bony and ivory. As
the fighting wore on, Tarvitz thought
he identified a status in those
crests. The fuller the chitin
growths, the more senior – and
larger – the warrior. Tarvitz made
2,2,2
his first kill with his bolter. The
megarachnid lunged out of the
suddenly vibrating stalks in front of
them, and decapitated Kercort with a
flick of its upper left blade. Even
stationary, it was a hyperactive
blur, as if its metabolism, its very
life, moved at some rate far faster
than that of the enhanced gene-seed
warriors of Chemos. Tarvitz had
opened fire, denting the centre line
of the megarachnid’s thorax armour
with three shots, before his  fourth
obliterated the thing’s head in a
shower of white paste and ivory crest
shards. Its legs stumbled and
scrabbled, its blade arms waved, and
then it fell, but just before it did,
2,2,3
there was another crash. The crash
was the sound of Kercort’s headless
body finally hitting the red dust,
arterial spray jetting from his
severed neck. That was how fast the
encounter had passed. From first
strike to clean kill, poor Kercort
had only had time to fall down. A
second megarachnid appeared behind
the first. Its flickering limbs had
torn Tarvitz’s bolter out of his
hands, and set a deep gouge across
the facing of his breastplate, right
across the palatine aquila displayed
there. That was a great crime. Alone
amongst the Legions, only the
Emperor’s Children had been
permitted, by the grace of the
2,2,4
Emperor himself, to wear that symbol
upon their chestplates. Backing away,
hearing bolter fire and yells from
the shivering thickets all around
him, Tarvitz had felt stung by
genuine insult, and had unslung his
broadsword, powered it, and struck
downwards with a two-handed cut. His
long, heavy blade had glanced off the
alien’s headcrest, chipping off
flecks of yellowish bone, and Tarvitz
had been forced to dance back out of
the reach of the four, slicing limb-
blades. His second strike had been
better. His sword missed the bone
crest and instead hacked deeply into
the megarachnid’s neck, at the
joint where the head connected to the
2,2,5
upper thorax. He had split the thorax
wide open to the centre, squirting
out a gush of glistening white ichor.
The megarachnid had trembled,
fidgeting, slowly understanding its
own death as Tarvitz wrenched his
blade back out. It took a moment to
die. It reached out with its
quivering blade-limbs, and touched
the tips of them against Tarvitz’s
recoiling face, two on either side of
the visor. The touch was almost
gentle. As it fell, the four points
made a shrieking sound as they
dragged backwards across the sides of
his visor, leaving bare metal
scratches in the purple gloss.
Someone was screaming. A bolter was
2,2,6
firing on full auto, and debris from
exploded grass stalks was spilling up
into the air. A third hostile
flickered at Tarvitz, but his blood
was up. He swung at it, turning his
body right around, and cut clean
through the mid line of the thorax,
between upper arms and lower legs.
Pale liquid spattered into the air,
and the top of the alien fell away.
The abdomen, and the half-thorax
remaining, pumping milky fluid,
continued to scurry on its four legs
for a moment before it collided with
a grass stalk and  toppled over. And
that was the fight done. The stalks
ceased their shivering, and the
wretched grubs started to whistle and
2,2,7
buzz again. When they had been on the
ground for ninety hours, and had
engaged with the megarachnid twenty-
eight times in the dense thickets of
the grass forests, seven of their
meagre party were dead and gone. The
process of advance became mechanical,
almost trance-like. There was no
guiding narrative, no strategic
detail. They had established no
contact with the Blood Angels, or
their lord, or any segments of other
sections of their company. They moved
forwards, and every few kilometres
fighting broke out. This was an
almost perfect war, Saul Tarvitz
decided. Simple and engrossing,
testing their combat skills and
2,2,8
physical prowess to destruction. It
was like a training regime made
lethal. Only days afterwards did he
appreciate how truly focussed he had
become during the undertaking. His
instincts had grown as sharp as the
enemy limb-blades. He was on guard at
all times, with no opportunity to
slacken or lose concentration, for
the megarachnid ambushes were sudden
and ferocious, and came out of
nowhere. The party moved, then
fought, moved, then fought, without
space for rest or reflection. Tarvitz
had never known, and would never know
again, such pure martial perfection,
utterly uncomplicated by politics or
beliefs. He and his fellows were
2,2,9
weapons of the Emperor, and the
megarachnid were the unqualified
quintessence of the hostile cosmos
that stood in man’s way. Almost all
of the gradually dwindling Astartes
had switched to their blades. It took
too many bolter rounds to bring a
megarachnid down. A blade was surer,
provided one was quick enough to get
the first stroke in, and strong
enough to ensure that stroke was a
killing blow. It was with some
surprise that Tarvitz discovered his
fellow captain, Lucius, thought
differently. As they pushed on,
Lucius boasted that he was playing
the enemy. ‘It’s like duelling
with four swordsmen at once,’
2,2,10
Lucius crowed. Lucius was a
bladesman. To Tarvitz’s knowledge,
Lucius had never been bested in
swordplay. Where Tarvitz, and men
like him, rotated through weapon
drills to extend perfection in all
forms and manners, Lucius had made a
single art of the sword.
Frustratingly, his firearms skill was
such that he never seemed  to need to
hone it on the ranges. It was
Lucius’s proudest claim to have
‘personally worn out’ four
practice cages. Sometimes, the
Legion’s other sword-masters,
warriors like Ekhelon and Brazenor,
sparred with Lucius to improve their
technique. It was said, Eidolon
2,2,11
himself often chose Lucius as a
training partner. Lucius carried an
antique long sword, a relic of the
Unification Wars, forged in the
smithies of the Urals by artisans of
the Terrawatt Clan. It was a
masterpiece of perfect balance and
temper. Usually, he fought with it in
the old style, with a combat shield
locked to his left arm. The sword’s
wirewound handle was unusually long,
enabling him to change from a single
to a double grip, to spin the blade
one-handed like a baton, and to slide
the pressure of his grip back and
forth: back for a looping swing,
forwards for a taut, focussed thrust.
He had his shield strapped across his
2,2,12
back, and carried the megarachnid
blade-limb in his left hand as a
secondary sword. He had bound the
base of the severed limb with strips
of steel paper from the liner of his
shield to prevent the edge from
further harming his grip. Head low,
he paced forwards through the endless
avenues of stalks, hungry for any
opportunity to deal death. During the
twelfth attack, Tarvitz witnessed
Lucius at work for the first time.
Lucius met a megarachnid head on, and
set up a flurry of dazzling, ringing
blows, his two blades against the
creature’s four. Tarvitz saw three
opportunities for straight kill
strokes that Lucius didn’t so much
2,2,13
miss as choose not to take. He was
enjoying himself so much that he
didn’t want the game to end too
soon. ‘We will take one or two
alive later,’ he told Tarvitz after
the fight, without a hint of irony.
‘I will chain them in the practice
cages. They will be useful for
sparring.’ ‘They are xenos,’
Tarvitz scolded. ‘If I am going to
improve at all, I need decent
practice. Practice that will test me.
Do you know of a man who could push
me?’ ‘They are xenos,’ Tarvitz
said again. ‘Perhaps it is the
Emperor’s will,’ Lucius
suggested. ‘Perhaps these things
have been placed in the cosmos to
2,2,14
improve our war skills.’ Tarvitz
was proud that he didn’t even begin
to understand how xenos minds worked,
but he was also confident that the
purpose of the  megarachnid, if they
had some higher, ineffable purpose,
was more than to give mankind a
demanding training partner. He
wondered, briefly, if they had
language, or culture, culture as a
man might recognise it. Art? Science?
Emotion? Or were those things as
seamlessly and exotically bonded into
them as their technologies, so that
mortal man might not differentiate or
identify them? Were they driven by
some emotive cause to attack the
Emperor’s Children, or were they
2,2,15
simply responding to trespass, like a
mound of drone insects prodded with a
stick? It occurred to him that the
megarachnid might be attacking
because, to them, the humans were
hideous and xenos. It was a terrible
thought. Surely the megarachnid could
see the superiority of the human
design compared with their own? Maybe
they fought because of jealousy?
Lucius was busy droning on,
delightedly explaining some new
finesse of wrist-turn that fighting
the megarachnid had already taught
him. He was demonstrating the
technique against the bole of a
stalk. ‘See? A lift and turn. Lift
and turn. The blow comes down and in.
2,2,16
It would be of no purpose against a
man, but here it is essential. I
think I will compose a treatise on
it. The move should be called “the
Lucius”, don’t you think? How
fine does that sound?’ ‘Very
fine,’ Tarvitz replied. ‘Here is
something!’ a voice exclaimed over
the vox. It was Sakian. They hurried
to him. He had found a sudden and
surprising clearing in the grass
forest. The stalks had stopped,
exposing a broad field of bare, red
earth many kilometres square. ‘What
is this?’ asked Bulle. Tarvitz
wondered if the space had been
deliberately cleared, but there was
no sign that stalks had ever sprouted
2,2,17
there. The tall, swishing forest
surrounded the area on all sides. One
by one, the Astartes stepped out into
the open. It was unsettling. Moving
through the grass forest, there had
been precious little sense of going
anywhere, because everywhere looked
the same. This gap was suddenly a
landmark. A disconcerting difference.
‘Look here,’ Sakian called. He
was twenty metres out in the barren
plain, kneeling to examine something.
Tarvitz realised he had called out
because of something more specific
than the change in environs.  ‘What
is it?’ Tarvitz asked, trudging
forwards to join Sakian. ‘I think I
know, captain,’ Sakian replied,
2,2,18
‘but I don’t like to say it. I
saw it here on the ground.’ Sakian
held the object out so that Tarvitz
could inspect it. It was a vaguely
triangular, vaguely concave piece of
tinted glass, with rounded corners,
roughly nine centimetres on its
longest side. Its edges were lipped,
and machine formed. Tarvitz knew what
it was at once, because he was
staring at it through two similar
objects. It was a visor lens from an
Astartes helmet. What manner of force
could have popped it out of its
ceramite frame? ‘It’s what you
think it is,’ Tarvitz told Sakian.
‘Not one of ours.’ ‘No. I
don’t think so. The shape is wrong.
2,2,19
This is Mark III.’ ‘The Blood
Angels, then?’ ‘Yes. The Blood
Angels.’ The first physical proof
that anyone had been here before
them. ‘Look around!’ Tarvitz
ordered to the others. ‘Search the
dirt!’ The troop spent ten minutes
searching. Nothing else was
discovered. Overhead, an especially
fierce shield-storm had begun to
close in, as if drawn to them.
Furious ripples of lightning striated
the heavy clouds. The light grew
yellow, and the storm’s distortions
whined and shrieked intrusively into
their vox-links. ‘We’re exposed
out here,’ Bulle muttered.
‘Let’s get back into the
2,2,20
forest.’ Tarvitz was amused. Bulle
made it sound as if the stalk
thickets were safe ground. Giant
forks of lightning, savage and
yellow-white phosphorescent, were
searing down into the open space,
explosively scorching the earth.
Though each fork only existed for a
nanosecond, they seemed solid and
real, like fundamental, physical
structures, like upturned, thorny
trees. Three Astartes, including
Lucius, were struck. Secure in their
Mark IV plate, they shrugged off the
massive, detonating impacts and
laughed as aftershock electrical
blooms crackled like garlands of blue
wire around their armour for a few
2,2,21
seconds. ‘Bulle’s right,’
Lucius said, his vox signal
temporarily mauled by the discharge
dissipating from his suit. ‘I want
to go back into the forest. I want to
hunt. I haven’t killed anything in
twenty minutes.’  Several of the
men around roared their approval at
Lucius’s wilfully belligerent
pronouncement. They slapped their
fists against their shields. Tarvitz
had been trying to contact Lord
Eidolon again, or anyone else, but
the storm was still blocking him. He
was concerned that the few of them
still remaining should not separate,
but Lucius’s bravado had annoyed
him. ‘Do as you see fit, captain. I
2,2,22
want to find out what that is,’ he
said to Lucius, petulantly. He
pointed. On the far side of the
cleared space, three or four
kilometres away, he could make out
large white blobs in the far
thickets. ‘More trees,’ Lucius
said. ‘Yes, but–’ ‘Oh, very
well,’ Lucius conceded. There were
now just twenty-two warriors in the
group led by Lucius and Tarvitz. They
spread out in a loose line and began
to cross the open space. The
clearing, at least, afforded them
time to see any megarachnid approach.
The storm above grew still more
ferocious. Five more men were struck.
One of them, Ulzoras, was actually
2,2,23
knocked off his feet. They saw fused,
glassy craters in the ground where
lightning had earthed with the force
of penetrator missiles. The shield-
storm seemed to be pressing down on
them, like a lid across the sky,
pressurising the air, and squeezing
them in an atmospheric vice. When the
megarachnid appeared, they showed
themselves in ones or twos at first.
Katz saw them initially, and called
out. The grey things were milling in
and out of the edges of the stalk
forest. Then they began to emerge en
masse and move across the open ground
towards the Astartes war party.
‘Terra!’ Lucius clucked. ‘Nowwe
have a battle.’ There were more
2,2,24
than a hundred of the aliens.
Chittering, they closed on the
Astartes from all sides, an
accelerating ring of onrushing grey,
closing faster and faster, a blur of
scurrying limbs. ‘Form a ring,’
Tarvitz instructed calmly.
‘Bolters.’ He stuck his
broadsword, tip down, into the red
earth beside him and unslung his
firearm. Others did likewise. Tarvitz
noticed that Lucius kept his grip on
his paired blades. The flood of
megarachnid swallowed up the ground,
and closed in a concentric ring
around the circle of the Emperor’s
Children. ‘Ready yourselves,’
Tarvitz called. Lucius, his swords
2,2,25
raised by his sides, was evidently
happy for Tarvitz to command the
action.  They could hear the dry,
febrile chittering as it came closer.
The drumming of four hundred rapid
legs. Tarvitz nodded to Bulle, who
was the best marksman in the troop.
‘The order is yours,’ he said.
‘Thank you, sir.’ Bulle raised
his bolter and yelled, ‘At ten
metres! Shoot till you’re dry!’
‘Then blades!’ Tarvitz bellowed.
When the tightening wave of
megarachnid warriors was ten and a
half metres away, Bulle yelled,
‘Fire!’ and the firm circle of
Astartes opened up. Their weapons
made a huge, rolling noise, despite
2,2,26
the storm. All around them, the front
ranks of the enemy buckled and
toppled, some splintering apart, some
bursting. Pieces of thorny, zinc-grey
metal spun away into the air. As
Bulle had instructed, the Astartes
fired until their weapons were spent,
and then hefted their blades up in
time to meet the onrushing foe. The
megarachnid broke around them like a
wave around a rock. There was a
flurried, multiplied din of metal-on-
metal impacts as human and alien
blades clashed. Tarvitz saw Lucius
rush forwards at the last minute,
swords swinging, meeting the
megarachnid host head on, severing
and hacking. The battle lasted for
2,2,27
three minutes. Its intensity should
have been spread out across an hour
or two. Five more Astartes died.
Dozens of megarachnid things fell,
broken and rent, onto the red earth.
Reflecting upon the encounter later,
Tarvitz found he could not remember
any single detail of the fight.
He’d dropped his bolter and raised
his broadsword, and then it had all
become a smear of bewildering
moments. He found himself, standing
there, his limbs aching from effort,
his sword and armour dripping with
stringy, white matter. The
megarachnid were falling back,
pouring back, as rapidly as they had
advanced. ‘Regroup! Reload!’
2,2,28
Tarvitz heard himself yelling.
‘Look!’ Katz called out. Tarvitz
looked. There was something in the
sky, objects sweeping down out of the
molten, fracturing air above them.
The megarachnid had more than one
biological form. The flying things
descended on long, glassy wings that
beat so furiously they were just
flickering blurs that made a strident
thrumming noise. Their bodies were
glossy black, their abdomens much
fuller and longer than those  of
their land-bound cousins. Their
slender black legs were pulled up
beneath them, like wrought-iron
undercarriages. The winged clades
took men from the air, dropping
2,2,29
sharply and seizing armoured forms in
the hooked embrace of their dark
limbs. Men fought back, struggled,
fired their weapons, but within
seconds four or five warriors had
been snatched up and borne away into
the tumultuous sky, writhing and
shouting. Unit cohesion broke. The
men scattered, trying to evade the
things swooping out of the air.
Tarvitz yelled for order, but knew it
was futile. He was forced to duck as
a winged shape rushed over him,
making a reverberative, chopping
drone. He caught a glimpse of a head
crest formed into a long, dark,
malevolent hook. Another passed close
by. Boltguns were pumping. Tarvitz
2,2,30
lashed out with his sword, striking
high, trying to drive the creature
back. The thrumming of its wings was
distressingly loud and made his
diaphragm quiver. He jabbed and
thrust with his blade, and the thing
bobbed backwards across the soil,
effortless and light. With a sharp,
sudden movement, it turned away, took
hold of another man, and lifted him
into the sky. Another of the winged
things had seized Lucius. It had him
by the back and was taking him off
the ground. Lucius, twisting like a
maniac, was trying to stab his swords
up behind himself, to no avail.
Tarvitz sprang forwards and grabbed
hold of Lucius as he left the ground.
2,2,31
Tarvitz thrust up past him with his
broadsword, but a hooked black leg
struck him, and his broadsword
tumbled away out of his hand. He held
on to Lucius. ‘Drop! Drop!’
Lucius yelled. Tarvitz could see that
the thing held Lucius by the shield
strapped to his back. Swinging, he
wrenched out his combat knife, and
hacked at the straps. They sheared
away, and Lucius and Tarvitz fell
from the thing’s clutches,
plummeting ten metres onto the red
dust. The flying clades made off,
taking nine of the Astartes with
them. They were heading in the
direction of the white blobs in the
far thickets. Tarvitz didn’t need
2,2,32
to give an order. The remaining
warriors took off across the ground
as fast as they could, chasing after
the retreating dots. They caught up
with them at the far edge of the
clearing. The white blobs had indeed
been more trees, three of them, and
now Lucius discovered they had a
purpose after all.  The bodies of the
taken Astartes were impaled upon the
thorns of the trees, rammed onto the
stone spikes, their armoured shapes
skewered into place, allowing the
winged megarachnid to feed upon them.
The creatures, their wings now
stilled and quiet and extended, long
and slender, out behind their bodies
like bars of stained glass, were
2,2,33
crawling over the stone trees,
gnawing and biting, using their
hooked head crests to break open
thorn-pinned armour to get at the
meat within. Tarvitz and the others
came to a halt and watched in sick
dismay. Blood was dripping from the
white thorns and streaming down the
squat, chalky trunks. Their brothers
were not alone amongst the thorns.
Other cadavers hung there, rotten and
rendered down to bone and dry
gristle. Pieces of red armour plate
hung from the reduced bodies, or
littered the ground at the foot of
the trees. At last, they had found
out what had happened to the Blood
Angels.  
2,2,34
THREE
 During the voyage Bad
poetry Secrets During the twelve-week
voyage between Sixty-Three Nineteen
and One Forty Twenty, Loken had come
to the conclusion that Sindermann was
avoiding him. He finally located him
in the endless stacks of Archive
Chamber Three. The iterator was
sitting in a stilt-chair, examining
ancient texts secured on one of the
high shelves of the archive’s
gloomiest back annexes. There was no
bustle of activity back here, no
hurrying servitors laden with
requested books. Loken presumed that
the material catalogued in this area
was of little interest to the average
2,3,1
scholar. Sindermann didn’t hear him
approach. He was intently studying a
fragile old manuscript, the stilt-
chair’s reading lamp tilted over
his left shoulder to illuminate the
pages. ‘Hello?’ Loken hissed.
Sindermann looked down and saw Loken.
He started slightly, as if woken from
a deep sleep. ‘Garviel,’ he
whispered. ‘One moment.’
Sindermann put the manuscript back on
the shelf, but several other books
were piled up in the chair’s basket
rack. As he re-shelved the
manuscript, Sindermann’s hands
seemed to tremble. He pulled a brass
lever on the chair’s armrest and
the stilt legs telescoped down with a
2,3,2
breathy hiss until he was at ground
level. Loken reached out to steady
the iterator as he stepped out of the
chair. ‘Thank you, Garviel.’
‘What are you doing back here?’
Loken asked. ‘Oh, you know.
Reading.’ ‘Reading what?’
Sindermann cast what Loken judged to
be a slightly guilty look at the
books in his chair’s rack. Guilty,
or embarrassed. ‘I confess,’
Sindermann said, ‘I have been
seeking solace in some old and
terribly unfashionable material. Pre-
Unification fiction, and some poetry.
Just desolate scraps, for so little
remains, but I find some comfort in
it.’ ‘May I?’ Loken asked,
2,3,3
gesturing to the basket. ‘Of
course,’ said Sindermann. Loken sat
down in the brass chair, which
creaked under his weight, and took
some of the old books out of the side
basket to examine them. They were
frayed and foxed, even though some of
them had evidently been rebound or
sleeved from earlier bindings prior
to archiving. ‘The Golden Age of
Sumaturan?’Poetry Loken said.
‘Folk Tales of Old ? What’s this?
The Chronicles of Ursh ?’ Muscovy
‘Boisterous fictions and bloody
histories, with the occasional
smattering of fine lyric verse.’
Loken took out another, heavy book.
‘Tyranny of the Panpacific ,’ he
2,3,4
read, and flipped open the cover to
see the title page. ‘”An Epic
Poem in Nine Cantos, Exalting the
Rule of Narthan Dume”… it sounds
rather dry.’ ‘It’s raw-headed
and robust, and quite bawdy in parts.
The work of overexcited poets trying
to turn the matter of their own,
wretched times into myth. I’m
rather fond of it. I used to read
such things as a child. Fairy tales
from another time.’ ‘A better
time?’ Sindermann baulked. ‘Oh,
Terra, no! An awful time, a
murderous, rancorous age when we were
sliding into species doom, not
knowing that the Emperor would come
and apply the brakes to our cultural
2,3,5
plummet.’ ‘But they comfort
you?’ ‘They remind me of my
boyhood. That comforts me.’ ‘Do
you need comforting?’ Loken asked,
putting the books back in the basket
and looking up at the old man.
‘I’ve barely seen you since–’
‘Since the mountains,’ Sindermann
finished, with a sad smile.
‘Indeed. I’ve been to the school
on several occasions to hear you
brief the iterators, but always
there’s someone standing in for
you. How are you?’  Sindermann
shrugged. ‘I confess, I’ve been
better.’ ‘Your injuries
still–‘ ‘I’ve healed in body,
Garviel, but…’ Sindermann tapped
2,3,6
his temple with a gnarled finger.
‘I’m unsettled. I haven’t felt
much like speaking. The fire’s not
in me just now. It will return.
I’ve kept my own company, and I’m
on the mend.’ Loken stared at the
old iterator. He seemed so frail,
like a baby bird, pale and skinny
necked. It had been nine weeks since
the bloodshed at the Whisperheads,
and most of that time they had spent
in warp transit. Loken felt he had
begun to come to terms with things
himself, but seeing Sindermann, he
realised how close to the surface the
hurt lay. He could block it out. He
was Astartes. But Sindermann was a
mortal man, and nothing like as
2,3,7
resilient. ‘I wish I could–’
Sindermann held up a hand. ‘Please.
The Warmaster himself was kind enough
to speak with me about it, privately.
I understand what happened, and I am
a wiser man for it.’ Loken got out
of the chair and allowed Sindermann
to take his place. The iterator sat
down, gratefully. ‘He keeps me
close,’ Loken said. ‘Who does?’
‘The Warmaster. He brought me and
the Tenth with him on this
undertaking, just to keep me by him.
So he could watch me.’
‘Because?’ ‘Because I’ve seen
what few have seen. Because I’ve
seen what the warp can do if we’re
not careful.’ ‘Then our beloved
2,3,8
commander is very wise, Garviel. Not
only has he given you something to
occupy your mind with, he’s
offering you the chance to reforge
your courage in battle. He still
needs you.’ Sindermann got to his
feet again and limped along the book
stacks for a moment, tracing his thin
hand across the spines. From his
gait, Loken knew he hadn’t healed
anything like as well as he’d
claimed. He seemed occupied with the
books once more. Loken waited for a
moment. ‘I should go,’ he said.
‘I have duties to attend to.’
Sindermann smiled and waved Loken on
his way with eyelash blinks of his
fingers. ‘I’ve enjoyed talking
2,3,9
with you again,’ Loken said.
‘It’s been too long.’ ‘It
has.’ ‘I’ll come back soon. A
day or two. Hear you brief,
perhaps?’ ‘I might be up to
that.’ Loken took a book out of the
basket. ‘These comfort you, you
say?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘May I borrow
one?’ ‘If you bring it back. What
have you there?’ Sindermann
shuffled over and took the volume
from Loken. ‘Sumaturan poetry? I
don’t think that’s you. Try
this–’ He took one of the other
books out of the chair’s rack.
‘The Chronicles of Ursh. Forty
chapters, detailing the savage reign
of Kalagann. You’ll enjoy that.
2,3,10
Very bloody, with a high body count.
Leave the poetry to me.’ Loken
scanned the old book and then put it
under his arm. ‘Thanks for the
recommendation. If you like poetry, I
have some for you.’ ‘Really?’
‘One of the remembrancers–’
‘Oh yes,’ Sindermann nodded.
‘Karkasy. I was told you’d
vouched for him.’ ‘It was a
favour, to a friend.’ ‘And by
friend, you mean Mersadie Oliton?’
Loken laughed. ‘You told me you’d
kept your own company these last few
months, yet you still know everything
about everything.’ ‘That’s my
job. The juniors keep me up to speed.
I understand you’ve indulged her a
2,3,11
little. As your own remembrancer.’
‘Is that wrong?’ ‘Not at
all!’ Sindermann smiled.
‘That’s the way it’s supposed
to work. Use her, Garviel. Let her
use you. One day, perhaps, there will
be far finer books in the Imperial
archives than these poor relics.’
‘Karkasy was going to be sent away.
I arranged probation, and part of
that was for him to submit all his
work to me. I can’t make head nor
tail of it. Poetry. I don’t do
poetry. Can I give it to you?’
‘Of course.’ Loken turned to
leave. ‘What was the book you put
back?’ he asked. ‘What?’
‘When I arrived, you had volumes in
2,3,12
your basket there, but you were also
studying one, intently, it seemed to
me. You put it back on the shelves.
What was it?’ ‘Bad poetry,’
said Sindermann. The fleet had
embarked for Murder less than a week
after the Whisperheads incident. The
transmitted requests for assistance
had become so insistent that any
debate as to what the 63rd Expedition
undertook next became academic. The
Warmaster had ordered the immediate
departure of ten companies under his
personal command, leaving Varvaras
behind with the bulk of the fleet to
oversee the general withdrawal from
Sixty-Three Nineteen. Once Tenth
Company had been chosen as part of
2,3,13
the relief force, Loken had found
himself too occupied with the hectic
preparations for transit to let his
mind dwell on the incident. It was a
relief to be busy. There were squad
formations to be reassigned, and
replacements to be selected from the
Legion’s novitiate and Scout
auxiliaries. He had to find men to
fill the gaps in Hellebore and
Brakespur, and that meant screening
young candidates and making decisions
that would change lives forever. Who
were the best? Who should be given
the chance to advance to full
Astartes status? Torgaddon and
Aximand assisted Loken in this solemn
task, and he was thankful for their
2,3,14
contributions. Little Horus, in
particular, seemed to have
extraordinary insight regarding
candidates. He saw true strengths in
some that Loken would have dismissed,
and flaws in others that Loken liked
the look of. Loken began to
appreciate that Aximand’s place in
the Mournival had been earned by his
astonishing analytical precision.
Loken had elected to clear out the
dormitory cells of the dead men
himself. ‘Vipus and I can do
that,’ Torgaddon said. ‘Don’t
bother yourself.’ ‘I want to do
it,’ Loken replied. ‘I should do
it.’ ‘Let him, Tarik,’ said
Aximand. ‘He’s right. He
2,3,15
should.’ Loken found himself truly
warming to Little Horus for the first
time. He had not imagined they would
ever be close, but what had at first
seemed to be quiet, reserved and
stern in Little Horus Aximand was
proving to be plain-spoken, empathic
and wise. When he came to clean out
the modest, spartan cells, Loken made
a discovery. The warriors had little
in the way of personal effects: some
clothing, some select trophies, and
little, tightly bound scrolls of oath
papers, usually stored in canvas
cargo sacks beneath their crude cots.
Amongst Xavyer Jubal’s meagre
effects, Loken found a small, silver
medal, unmounted on any chain or
2,3,16
cord. It was the size of a coin, a
wolf’s head set against a crescent
moon. ‘What is this?’ Loken asked
Nero Vipus, who had come along with
him. ‘I can’t say, Garvi.’ ‘I
think I know what it is,’ Loken
said, a little annoyed at his
friend’s blank response, ‘and I
think you do too.’ ‘I really
can’t say.’ ‘Then guess,’
Loken snapped. Vipus suddenly seemed
very caught up in examining the way
the flesh of his wrist was healing
around the augmetic implant he had
been fitted with. ‘Nero…’ ‘It
could be a lodge medal, Garvi,’
Vipus replied dismissively. ‘I
can’t say for sure.’ ‘That’s
2,3,17
what I thought,’ Loken said. He
turned the silver medal over in his
palm. ‘Jubal was a lodge member,
then, eh?’ ‘So what if he was?’
‘You know my feelings on the
subject,’ Loken replied.
Officially, there were no warrior
lodges, or any other kind of
fraternities, within the Adeptus
Astartes. It was common knowledge
that the Emperor frowned on such
institutions, claiming they were
dangerously close to cults, and only
a step away from the Imperial creed,
the Lectitio Divinitatus, that
supported the notion of the Emperor,
beloved by all, as a god. But
fraternal lodges did exist within the
2,3,18
Astartes, occult and private.
According to rumours, they had been
active in the XVI Legion for a long
time. Some six decades earlier, the
Luna Wolves, in collaboration with
the XVII Legion, the Word Bearers,
had undertaken the compliance of a
world called Davin. A feral place,
Davin had been controlled by a
remarkable warrior caste, whose
savage nobility had won the respect
of the Astartes sent to pacify their
warring feuds. The Davinite warriors
had ruled their world through a
complex structure of warrior lodges,
quasi-religious societies that had
venerated various local predators. By
cultural osmosis, the lodge practices
2,3,19
had been quietly absorbed by the
Legions. Loken had once asked his
mentor, Sindermann, about them.
‘They’re  harmless enough,’ the
iterator had told him. ‘Warriors
always seek the brotherhood of their
kind. As I understand it, they seek
to promote fellowship across the
hierarchies of command, irrespective
of rank or position. A kind of
internal bond, a ribwork of loyalty
that operates, as it were,
perpendicular to the official chain
of command.’ Loken had never been
sure what something that operated
perpendicular to the chain of command
might look like, but it sounded wrong
to him. Wrong, if nothing else, in
2,3,20
that it was deliberately secret and
thus deceitful. Wrong, in that the
Emperor, beloved by all, disapproved
of them. ‘Of course,’ Sindermann
had added, ‘I can’t actually say
if they exist.’ Real or not, Loken
had made it plain that any Astartes
intending to serve under his
captaincy should have nothing to do
with them. There had never been any
sign that anyone in the Tenth was
involved in lodge activities. Now the
medal had turned up. A lodge medal,
belonging to the man who had turned
into a daemon and killed his own.
Loken was greatly troubled by the
discovery. He told Vipus that he
wanted it made known that any man in
2,3,21
his command who had information
concerning the existence of lodges
should come forwards and speak with
him, privately if necessary. The next
day, when Loken came to sort through
the personal effects he had gathered,
one last time, he found the medal had
disappeared. In the last few days
before departure, Mersadie Oliton had
come to him several times, pleading
Karkasy’s case. Loken remembered
her talking to him about it on his
return from the Whisperheads, but he
had been too distracted then. He
cared little about the fate of a
remembrancer, especially one foolish
enough to anger the expedition
authorities. But it was another
2,3,22
distraction, and he needed as many as
he could get. After consulting with
Maloghurst, he told her he would
intervene. Ignace Karkasy was a poet
and, it appeared, an idiot. He
didn’t know when to shut up. On a
surface visit to Sixty-Three
Nineteen, he had wandered away from
the legitimate areas of visit, got
drunk, and then shot his mouth off to
such an extent he had received a
near-fatal beating from a crew of
army troopers. ‘He is going to be
sent away,’ Mersadie said. ‘Back
to Terra, in disgrace, his
certification stripped away. It’s
wrong, captain. Ignace is a good
man…’ ‘Really?’  ‘No, all
2,3,23
right. He’s a lousy man. Uncouth.
Stubborn. Annoying. But he is a great
poet, and he speaks the truth, no
matter how unpalatable that is.
Ignace didn’t get beaten up for
lying.’ Recovered enough from his
beating to have been transferred from
the flagship’s infirmary to a
holding cell, Ignace Karkasy was a
dishevelled, unedifying prospect. He
rose as Loken walked in and the stab
lights came on. ‘Captain, sir,’
he began. ‘I am gratified you take
an interest in my pathetic
affairs.’ ‘You have persuasive
friends,’ Loken said. ‘Oliton,
and Keeler too.’ ‘Captain Loken,
I had no idea I had persuasive
2,3,24
friends. In point of fact, I had
little notion I had friends at all.
Mersadie is kind, as I’m sure
you’ve realised. Euphrati… I
heard there was some trouble she was
caught up in.’ ‘There was.’
‘Is she well? Was she hurt?’
‘She’s fine,’ Loken replied,
although he had no idea what state
Keeler was in. He hadn’t seen her.
She’d sent him a note, requesting
his intervention in Karkasy’s case.
Loken suspected Mersadie Oliton’s
influence. Ignace Karkasy was a big
man, but he had suffered a severe
assault. His face was still puffy and
swollen, and the bruises had
discoloured his skin yellow like
2,3,25
jaundice. Blood vessels had burst in
his hang-dog eyes. Every movement he
made seemed to give him pain. ‘I
understand you’re outspoken,’
Loken said. ‘Something of an
iconoclast?’ ‘Yes, yes,’
Karkasy said, shaking his head,
‘but I’ll grow out of it, I
promise you.’ ‘They want rid of
you. They want to send you home,’
said Loken. ‘The senior
remembrancers believe you’re giving
the order a bad name.’ ‘Captain,
I could give someone a bad name just
by standing next to them.’ That
made Loken smile. He was beginning to
like the man. ‘I’ve spoken with
the Warmaster’s equerry about you,
2,3,26
Karkasy,’ Loken said. ‘There is a
potential for probation here. If a
senior Astartes, such as myself,
vouches for you, then you could stay
with the expedition.’ ‘There’d
be conditions?’ Karkasy asked.
‘Of course there would, but first
of all I have to hear you tell me
that you want to stay.’ ‘I want
to stay. Great Terra, captain, I made
a mistake, but I want to stay. I
want to be part of this.’ Loken
nodded. ‘Mersadie says you should.
The equerry, too, has a soft spot for
you. I think Maloghurst likes an
underdog.’ ‘Sir, never has a dog
been so much under.’ ‘Here are
the conditions,’ Loken said.
2,3,27
‘Stick to them, or I will withdraw
my sponsorship of you entirely, and
you’ll be spending a cold forty
months lugging your arse back to
Terra. First, you reform your
habits.’ ‘I will, sir.
Absolutely.’ ‘Second, you report
to me every three days, my duties
permitting, and copy me with
everything you write. Everything, do
you understand? Work intended for
publication and idle scribbles.
Nothing goes past me. You will show
me your soul on a regular basis.’
‘I promise, captain, though I warn
you it’s an ugly, cross-eyed,
crookbacked, club-footed soul.’
‘I’ve seen ugly,’ Loken assured
2,3,28
him. ‘The third condition. A
question, really. Do you lie?’
‘No, sir, I don’t.’ ‘This is
what I’ve heard. You tell the
truth, unvarnished and unretouched.
You are judged a scoundrel for this.
You say things others dare not.’
Karkasy shrugged – with a groan
brought about by sore shoulders.
‘I’m confused, captain. Is saying
yes to that going to spoil my
chances?’ ‘Answer anyway.’
‘Captain Loken, I always, always
tell the truth as I see it, though it
gets me beaten to a pulp in army
bars. And, with my heart, I denounce
those who lie or deliberately blur
the whole truth.’ Loken nodded.
2,3,29
‘What did you say, remembrancer?
What did you say that provoked honest
troopers so far they took their fists
to you?’ Karkasy cleared his throat
and winced. ‘I said… I said the
Imperium would not endure. I said
that nothing lasts forever, no matter
how surely it has been built. I said
that we will be fighting forever,
just to keep ourselves alive.’
Loken did not reply. Karkasy rose to
his feet. ‘Was that the right
answer, sir?’ ‘Are there any
right answers, sir?’ Loken replied.
‘I know this… a warriorofficer of
the Imperial Fists said much the same
thing to me not long ago. He didn’t
use the same words, but the meaning
2,3,30
was identical. He was not sent
home.’ Loken laughed to himself.
‘Actually, as I think of it now, he
was, but  not for that reason.’
Loken looked across the cell at
Karkasy. ‘The third condition,
then. I will vouch for you, and stand
in recognisance for you. In return,
you must continue to tell the
truth.’ ‘Really? Are you sure
about that?’ ‘Truth is all we
have, Karkasy. Truth is what
separates us from the xenosbreeds and
the traitors. How will history judge
us fairly if it doesn’t have the
truth to read? I was told that was
what the remembrancer order was for.
You keep telling the truth, ugly and
2,3,31
unpalatable as it might be, and
I’ll keep sponsoring you.’
Following his strange and
disconcerting conversation with Kyril
Sindermann in the archives, Loken
walked along to the gallery chamber
in the flagship’s midships where
the remembrancers had taken to
gathering. As usual, Karkasy was
waiting for him under the high arch
of the chamber’s entrance. It was
their regular, agreed meeting place.
From the broad chamber beyond the
arch floated sounds of laughter,
conversation and music. Figures,
mostly remembrancers, but also some
crew personnel and military aides,
bustled in and out through the
2,3,32
archway, many in noisy, chattering
groups. The gallery chamber, one of
many aboard the massive flagship
designed for large assembly meetings,
addresses and military ceremonies,
had been given over to the
remembrancers’ use once it had been
recognised that they could not be
dissuaded from social gathering and
conviviality. It was most undignified
and undisciplined, as if a small
carnival had been permitted to pitch
in the austere halls of the grand
warship. All across the Imperium,
warships were making similar
accommodations as they adjusted to
the uncomfortable novelty of carrying
large communities of artists and
2,3,33
freethinkers with them. By their very
nature, the remembrancers could not
be regimented or controlled the way
the military complements of the ship
could. They had an unquenchable
desire to meet and debate and
carouse. By giving them a space for
their own use, the masters of the
expedition could at least ring-fence
their boisterous activities. The
chamber had become known as the
Retreat, and it had acquired a grubby
reputation. Loken had no wish to go
inside, and always arranged to  meet
Karkasy at the entrance. It felt so
odd to hear unrestrained laughter and
jaunty music in the solemn depths of
the Vengeful Spirit . Karkasy nodded
2,3,34
respectfully as the captain
approached him. Seven weeks of voyage
time had seen his injuries heal well,
and the bruises on his flesh were all
but gone. He presented Loken with a
printed sheaf of his latest work.
Other remembrancers, passing by in
little social cliques, eyed the
Astartes captain with curiosity and
surprise. ‘My most recent work,’
Karkasy said. ‘As agreed.’
‘Thank you. I’ll see you here in
three days.’ ‘There’s something
else, captain,’ Karkasy said, and
handed Loken a dataslate. He thumbed
it to life. Picts appeared on the
screen, beautifully composed picts of
him and Tenth Company, assembling for
2,3,35
embarkation. The banner. The files.
Here he was swearing his oath of
moment to Targost and Sedirae. The
Mournival. ‘Euphrati asked me to
give you this,’ Karkasy said.
‘Where is she?’ Loken asked. ‘I
don’t know, captain,’ Karkasy
said. ‘No one’s seen her about
much. She has become reclusive
since…’ ‘Since?’ ‘The
Whisperheads.’ ‘What has she told
you about that?’ ‘Nothing, sir.
She says there’s nothing to tell.
She says the first captain told her
there was nothing to tell.’
‘She’s right about that. These
are fine images. Thank you, Ignace.
Thank Keeler for me. I will treasure
2,3,36
these.’ Kakasy bowed and began to
walk back into the Retreat.
‘Karkasy?’ ‘Sir?’ ‘Look
after Keeler, please. For me. You and
Oliton. Make sure she’s not alone
too often.’ ‘Yes, captain. I
will.’ Six weeks into the voyage,
while Loken was drilling his new
recruits, Aximand came to him. ‘The
Chronicles of Ursh ?’ he muttered,
noticing the volume Loken had left
open beside the training mat. ‘It
pleases me,’ Loken replied. ‘I
enjoyed it as a child,’ Aximand
replied. ‘Vulgar, though.’ ‘I
think that’s why I like it,’
Loken replied. ‘What can I do for
you?’ ‘I wanted to speak to
2,3,37
you,’ Aximand said, ‘on a private
matter.’ Loken frowned. Aximand
opened his hand and revealed a silver
lodge medal. ‘I would like you to
give this a fair hearing,’ Aximand
said, once they had withdrawn to the
privacy of Loken’s arming chamber.
‘As a favour to me.’ ‘You know
how I feel about lodge activities?’
‘It’s been made known to me. I
admire your purity, but there’s no
hidden malice in the lodge. You have
my word, and I hope, by now, that’s
worth something.’ ‘It is. Who
told you of my interest?’ ‘I
can’t say. Garviel, there is a
lodge meeting tonight, and I would
like you to attend it as my guest. We
2,3,38
would like to embrace you to our
fraternity.’ ‘I’m not sure I
want to be embraced.’ Aximand
nodded his head. ‘I understand.
There would be no duress. Come,
attend, see for yourself and decide
for yourself. If you don’t like
what you find, then you’re free to
leave and disassociate yourself.’
Loken made no response. ‘It is
simply a band of brothers,’ Aximand
said. ‘A fraternity of warriors,
bi-partisan and without rank.’
‘So I’ve heard.’ ‘Since the
Whisperheads, we have had a vacancy.
We’d like you to fill it.’ ‘A
vacancy?’ Loken said. ‘You mean
Jubal? I saw his medal.’ ‘Will
2,3,39
you come with me?’ asked Aximand.
‘I will. Because it’s you who’s
asking me,’ said Loken.  
2,3,40
FOUR

Felling the Murder trees Megarachnid
industry Pleased to know you Their
brothers on the tree were already
dead, past saving, but Tarvitz could
not leave them skewered and
unavenged. The ruination of their
proud, perfect forms insulted his
eyes and the honour of his Legion. He
gathered all the explosives carried
by the remaining men, and moved
forwards towards the trees with Bulle
and Sakian. Lucius stayed with the
others. ‘You’re a fool to do
that,’ he told Tarvitz. ‘We might
yet need those charges.’ ‘What
for?’ Tarvitz asked. Lucius
2,4,1
shrugged. ‘We’ve a war to win
here.’ That almost made Saul
Tarvitz laugh. He wanted to say that
they were already dead. Murder had
swallowed the companies of Blood
Angels and now, thanks to Eidolon’s
zeal for glory, it had swallowed them
too. There was no way out. Tarvitz
didn’t know how many of the company
were still alive on the surface, but
if the other groups had suffered
losses commensurate to their own, the
full number could be little higher
than fifty. Fifty men, fifty Astartes
even, against a world of numberless
hostiles. This was not a war to win;
this was just a last stand, wherein,
by the Emperor’s grace, they might
2,4,2
take as many of the foe with them as
they could before they fell. He did
not say this to Lucius, but only
because others were in earshot.
Lucius’s brand of courage admitted
no reality, and if Tarvitz had been
plain about their situation, it would
have led to an argument. The last
thing the men  needed now was to see
their officers quarrelling. ‘I’ll
not suffer those trees to stand,’
Tarvitz said. With Bulle and Sakian,
he approached the white stone trees,
running low until they were in under
the shadows of their grim, rigid
canopies. The winged megarachnid up
among the thorns ignored them. They
could hear the cracking, clicking
2,4,3
noises of the insects’ feeding, and
occasional trickles of black blood
spattered down around them. They
divided the charges into three equal
amounts, and secured them to the
boles of the trees. Bulle set a
forty-second timer. They began to run
back towards the edge of the stalk
forest where Lucius and the rest of
the troop lay in cover. ‘Move it,
Saul,’ Lucius’s voice crackled
over the vox. Tarvitz didn’t reply.
‘Move it, Saul. Hurry. Don’t look
back.’ Still running, Tarvitz
looked behind him. Two of the winged
clades had disengaged themselves from
the feeding group and had taken to
the air. Their beating wings were
2,4,4
glass-blurs in the yellow light, and
the lightning flash glinted off their
polished black bodies. They circled
up away from the thorn trees and came
on in the direction of the three
figures, wings throcking the air like
the buzz of a gnat slowed and
amplified to gargantuan, bass
volumes. ‘Run!’ said Tarvitz.
Sakian glanced back. He lost his
footing and fell. Tarvitz skidded to
a halt and turned back, dragging
Sakian to his feet. Bulle had run on.
‘Twelve seconds!’ he yelled,
turning and drawing his bolter. He
kept backing away, but trained his
weapon at the oncoming forms. ‘Come
on!’ he yelled. Then he started to
2,4,5
fire and shouted ‘Drop! Drop!’
Sakian pushed them both down, and he
and Tarvitz sprawled onto the red
dirt as the first winged clade went
over them, so low the downdraft of
its whirring wings raised dust. It
rose past them and headed straight
for Bulle, but veered away as he
struck it twice with bolter rounds.
Tarvitz looked up and saw the second
megarachnid drop straight towards him
in a near stall, the kind of pounce-
dive that had snared so many of his
comrades earlier. He tried to roll
aside. The black thing filled the
entire sky. A bolter roared. Sakian
had cleared his weapon and was firing
upwards,  point blank. The shots tore
2,4,6
through the winged clade’s thorax
in a violent puff of smoke and chitin
shards, and the thing fell, crushing
them both beneath its weight. It
twitched and spasmed on top of them,
and Tarvitz heard Sakian cry out in
pain. Tarvitz scrabbled to heave it
away, his hands sticky with its
ichor. The charges went off. The
shockwave of flame rushed out across
the red dirt in all directions. It
scorched and demolished the nearby
edge of the stalk forest, and lifted
Tarvitz, Sakian and the thing pinning
them, into the air. It blew Bulle off
his feet, throwing him backwards. It
caught the flying thing, tore off its
wings, and hurled it into the
2,4,7
thickets. The blast levelled the
three stone trees. They collapsed
like buildings, like demolished
towers, fracturing into brittle
splinters and white dust as they fell
into the fireball. Two or three of
the winged clades feeding on the
trees took off, but they were on
fire, and the heat-suck of the
explosion tumbled them back into the
flames. Tarvitz got up. The trees had
been reduced to a heap of white slag,
burning furiously. A thick pall of
ash-white dust and smoke rolled off
the blast zone. Burning, smouldering
scads, like volcanic out-throw,
drizzled down over him. He hauled
Sakian upright. The creature’s
2,4,8
impact on them had broken Sakian’s
right upper arm, and that break had
been made worse when they had been
thrown by the blast. Sakian was
unsteady, but his genhanced
metabolism was already compensating.
Bulle, unhurt, was getting up by
himself. The vox stirred. It was
Lucius. ‘Happy now?’ he asked.
Beyond revenge and honour,
Tarvitz’s action had two unexpected
consequences. The second did not
become evident for some time, but the
first was apparent in less than
thirty minutes. Where the vox had
failed to link the scattered forces
on the surface, the blast succeeded.
Two other troops, one commanded by
2,4,9
Captain Anteus, the other by Lord
Eidolon himself, detected the
considerable detonation, and followed
the smoke plume to its source.
United, they had almost fifty
Astartes between them.  ‘Make
report to me,’ Eidolon said. They
had taken up position at the edge of
the clearing, some half a kilometre
from the destroyed trees, near the
hem of the stalk forest. The open
ground afforded them ample warning of
the approach of the megarachnid
scurrier-clades, and if the winged
forms reappeared, they could retreat
swiftly into the cover of the
thickets and mount a defence. Tarvitz
outlined all that had befallen his
2,4,10
troop since landfall as quickly and
clearly as possible. Lord Eidolon was
one of the primarch’s most senior
commanders, the first chosen to such
a role, and brooked no familiarity,
even from senior line officers like
Tarvitz. Saul could tell from his
manner that Eidolon was seething with
anger. The undertaking had not gone
at all to his liking. Tarvitz
wondered if Eidolon might ever admit
he was wrong to have ordered the
drop. He doubted it. Eidolon, like
all the elite hierarchy of the
Emperor’s Children, somehow made
pride a virtue. ‘Repeat what you
said about the trees,’ Eidolon
prompted. ‘The winged forms use
2,4,11
them to secure prey for feeding,
lord,’ Tarvitz said. ‘I
understand that,’ Eidolon snapped.
‘I’ve lost men to the winged
things, and I’ve seen the thorn
trees, but you say there were other
bodies?’ ‘The corpses of Blood
Angels, lord,’ Tarvitz nodded,
‘and men of the Imperial army force
too.’ ‘We’ve not seen that,’
Captain Anteus remarked. ‘It might
explain what happened to them,’
Eidolon replied. Anteus was one of
Eidolon’s chosen circle and enjoyed
a far more cordial relationship with
his lord than Tarvitz did. ‘Have
you proof?’ Anteus asked Tarvitz.
‘I destroyed the trees, as you
2,4,12
know, sir,’ Tarvitz said. ‘So you
don’t have proof?’ ‘My word is
proof,’ said Tarvitz. ‘And good
enough for me,’ Anteus nodded
courteously. ‘I meant no offence,
brother.’ ‘And I took none,
sir.’ ‘You used all your
charges?’ Eidolon asked. ‘Yes,
lord.’ ‘A waste.’ Tarvitz began
to reply, but stifled the words
before he could say them. If it
hadn’t been for his use of the
explosives, they wouldn’t have
reunited. If it  hadn’t been for
his use of the explosives, the ragged
corpses of fine Emperor’s Children
would have hung from stone gibbets in
ignominious disarray. ‘I told him
2,4,13
so, lord,’ Lucius remarked. ‘Told
him what?’ ‘That using all our
charges was a waste.’ ‘What’s
that in your hand, captain?’
Eidolon asked. Lucius held up the
limb-blade. ‘You taint us,’
Anteus said. ‘Shame on you. Using
an enemy’s claw like a sword…’
‘Throw it away, captain,’ Eidolon
said. ‘I’m surprised at you.’
‘Yes, lord.’ ‘Tarvitz?’
‘Yes, my lord?’ ‘The Blood
Angels will require some proof of
their fallen. Some relic they can
honour. You say shreds of armour hung
from those trees. Go and retrieve
some. Lucius can help you.’ ‘My
lord, should we not secure this–’
2,4,14
‘I gave you an order, captain.
Execute it please, or does the honour
of our brethren Legion mean nothing
to you?’ ‘I only thought to–’
‘Did I ask for your counsel? Are
you a lord commander, and privy to
the higher links of command?’
‘No, lord.’ ‘Then get to it,
captain. You too, Lucius. You men,
assist them.’ The local shield-
storm had blown out. The sky over the
wide clearing was surprisingly clear
and pale, as if night was finally
falling. Tarvitz had no idea of
Murder’s diurnal cycle. Since they
had made planetfall, night and day
periods must surely have passed, but
in the stalk forests, lit by the
2,4,15
storm flare, such changes had been
imperceptible. Now it seemed cooler,
stiller. The sky was a washed-out
beige, with filaments of darkness
threading through it. There was no
wind, and the flicker of sheet
lightning came from many kilometres
away. Tarvitz thought he could even
glimpse stars up there, in the darker
patches of the open sky.  He led his
party out to the ruins of the trees.
Lucius was grumbling, as if it was
all Tarvitz’s fault. ‘Shut up,’
Tarvitz told him on a closed channel.
‘Consider this ample payback for
your kiss-arse display to the lord
commander.’ ‘What are you talking
about?’ Lucius asked. ‘I told him
2,4,16
it was a waste, lord,’ Tarvitz
answered, mimicking Lucius’s words
in an unflattering voice. ‘I did
tell you!’ ‘Yes, you did, but
there’s such a thing as solidarity.
I thought we were friends.’ ‘We
are friends,’ Lucius said, hurt.
‘And that was the act of a
friend?’ ‘We are the Emperor’s
Children,’ Lucius said solemnly.
‘We seek perfection, we don’t
hide our mistakes. You made a
mistake. Acknowledging our failures
is another step on the road to
perfection. Isn’t that what our
primarch teaches?’ Tarvitz frowned.
Lucius was right. Primarch Fulgrim
taught that only by imperfection
2,4,17
could they fail the Emperor, and only
by recognising those failures could
they eradicate them. Tarvitz wished
someone would remind Eidolon of that
key tenet of their Legion’s
philosophy. ‘I made a mistake,’
Lucius admitted. ‘I used that blade
thing. I relished it. It was xenos.
Lord Eidolon was right to reprimand
me.’ ‘I told you it was xenos.
Twice.’ ‘Yes, you did. I owe you
an apology for that. You were right,
Saul. I’m sorry.’ ‘Never
mind.’ Lucius put his hand on
Tarvitz’s plated arm and stopped
him. ‘No, it’s not. I’m a fine
one to talk. You are always so
grounded, Saul. I know I mock you for
2,4,18
that. I’m sorry. I hope we’re
still friends.’ ‘Of course.’
‘Your steadfast manner is a true
virtue,’ Lucius said. ‘I become
obsessive sometimes, in the heat of
things. It is an imperfection of my
character. Perhaps you can help me
overcome it. Perhaps I can learn from
you.’ His voice had that childlike
tone in it that had made Tarvitz like
him in the first place.
‘Besides,’ Lucius added, ‘you
saved my life. I haven’t thanked
you for that.’  ‘No, you
haven’t, but there’s no need,
brother.’ ‘Then let’s get this
done, eh?’ The other men had waited
while Tarvitz and Lucius conducted
2,4,19
their private, vox-to-vox
conversation. The pair hurried over
to rejoin them. The men Eidolon had
picked to go with them were Bulle,
Pherost, Lodoroton and Tykus, all men
from Tarvitz’s squad. Eidolon was
so clearly punishing the troop, it
wasn’t funny. Tarvitz hated the
fact that his men suffered because he
was not in favour. And Tarvitz had a
feeling they weren’t being punished
for wasting charges. They were
suffering Eidolon’s opprobrium
because they had achieved more of
significance than either of the other
groups since the drop. They reached
the ruined trees and crunched up the
slopes of smouldering white slag.
2,4,20
Remnants of stone thorns stuck out of
the heap, like the antlers of bull
deer, some blackened with charred
scraps of flesh. ‘What do we do?’
asked Tykus. Tarvitz sighed, and
knelt down in the white spoil. He
began to sift aside the chalky debris
with his gloved hands. ‘This,’ he
said. They worked for an hour or two.
Some kind of night began to fall, and
the air temperature dropped sharply
as the light drained out of the sky.
Stars came out, properly, and distant
lightning played across the endless
grass forests ringing the clearing.
Immense heat was issuing from the
heart of the slag heap, and it made
the cold air around them shimmer.
2,4,21
They sifted the dusty slag piece by
piece, and retrieved two battered
shoulder plates, both Blood Angels
issue, and an Imperial army cap.
‘Is that enough?’ asked
Lodoroton. ‘Keep going,’ replied
Tarvitz. He looked out across the dim
clearing to where Eidolon’s force
was dug in. ‘Another hour, maybe,
and we’ll stop.’ Lucius found a
Blood Angels helmet. Part of the
skull was still inside it. Tykus
found a breastplate belonging to one
of the lost Emperor’s Children.
‘Bring that too,’ Tarvitz said.
Then Pherost found something that
almost killed him. It was one of the
winged clades, burned and buried, but
2,4,22
still alive. As Pherost pulled the
calcified cinders away, the crumpled
black thing, wingless  and ruptured,
reared up and stabbed at him with its
hooked headcrest. Pherost stumbled,
fell, and slithered down the slag
slope on his back. The clade
struggled after him, dragging its
damaged body, its broken wing bases
vibrating pointlessly. Tarvitz leapt
over and slew it with his broadsword.
It was so near death and dried out
that its body crumpled like paper
under his blade, and only a residual
ichor, thick like glue, oozed out.
‘All right?’ Tarvitz asked.
‘Just took me by surprise,’
Pherost replied, laughing it off.
2,4,23
‘Watch how you go,’ Tarvitz
warned the others. ‘Do you hear
that?’ asked Lucius. It had become
very still and dark, like a true and
proper night fall. Amping their
helmet acoustics, they could all hear
the chittering noise Lucius had
detected. In the edges of the
thickets, starlight flashed off busy
metallic forms. ‘They’re back,’
said Lucius, looking round at
Tarvitz. ‘Tarvitz to main party,’
Tarvitz voxed. ‘Hostile contact in
the edges of the forest.’ ‘We see
it, captain,’ Eidolon responded
immediately. ‘Hold your position
until we–’ The link cut off
abruptly, like it was being jammed.
2,4,24
‘We should go back,’ Lucius said.
‘Yes,’ Tarvitz agreed. A sudden
light and noise made them all start.
The main party, half a kilometre
away, had opened fire. Across the
distance, they heard and saw bolters
drumming and flashing in the
darkness. Distant zinc-grey forms
danced and jittered in the strobing
light of the gunfire. Eidolon’s
position had been attacked. ‘Come
on!’ Lucius cried. ‘And do
what?’ Tarvitz asked. ‘Wait!
Look!’ The six of them scrambled
down into cover on one side of the
spoil heap. Megarachnid were
approaching from the edges of the
forest, their marching grey forms
2,4,25
almost invisible except where they
caught the starlight and the distant
blink of lightning. They were
streaming towards the tree mound in
their hundreds, in neat, ordered
lines. Amongst them, there were other
shapes, bigger shapes, massive
megarachnid forms. Another clade
variant.  Tarvitz’s party slid down
the chalky rubble and backed away
into the open, the expanse of the
clearing behind them, keeping low. To
their right, Lord Eidolon’s
position was engulfed in loud,
furious combat. ‘What are they
doing?’ asked Bulle. ‘Look,’
said Tarvitz. The columns of
megarachnid ascended the heap of
2,4,26
rubble. Warrior forms, equipped with
quad-blades, took station around the
base, on guard. Others mounted the
slopes and began to sort the spoil,
clearing it with inhuman speed and
efficiency. Tarvitz saw warrior forms
doing this work, and also clades of a
similar design, but which possessed
spatulate shovel limbs in place of
blades. With minute precision, the
megarachnid began to disassemble the
rubble heap, and carry the loose
debris away into the thickets. They
formed long, mechanical work gangs to
do this. The more massive forms, the
clades Tarvitz had not seen before,
came forwards. They were superheavy
monsters with short, thick legs and
2,4,27
gigantic abdomens. They moved
ponderously, and began to gnaw and
suck on the loose rubble with
ghastly, oversized mouth-parts. The
smaller clades scurried around their
hefty forms, pulling skeins of white
matter from their abdominal
spinnerets with curiously dainty,
weaving motions of their upper limbs.
The smaller clades carried this
fibrous, stiffening matter back into
the increasingly cleared site and
began to plaster it together.
‘They’re rebuilding the trees,’
Bulle whispered. It was an
extraordinary sight. The massive
clades, weavers, were consuming the
broken scraps of the trees Tarvitz
2,4,28
had felled, and turning them into
fresh new material, like gelling
concrete. The smaller clades, busy
and scurrying, were taking the
material and forming new bases with
it in the space that others of their
kind had cleared. In less than ten
minutes, much of the area had been
picked clean, and the trunks of three
new trees were being formed. The
scurrying builders brought limb-loads
of wet, milk white matter to the
bases, and then regurgitated fluid
onto them so as to mix them as
cement. Their limbs whirred and
shaped like the trowels of master
builders. Still, the battle behind
them roared. Lucius kept glancing in
2,4,29
the direction of the fight. ‘We
should go back,’ he whispered.
‘Lord Eidolon needs us.’ ‘If he
can’t win without the six of us,’
Tarvitz said, ‘he can’t win. I
felled  these trees. I’ll not see
them built again. Who’s with me?’
Bulle answered ‘Aye.’ So did
Pherost, Lodoroton and Tykus. ‘Very
well,’ said Lucius. ‘What do we
do?’ But Tarvitz had already drawn
his broadsword and was charging the
megarachnid workers. The fight that
followed was simple insanity. The six
Astartes, blades out, bolters ready,
rushed the megarachnid work gangs and
made war upon them in the cold night
air. Picket clades, warrior forms
2,4,30
drawn up as sentinels around the edge
of the site, alerted to them first
and rushed out in defence. Lucius and
Bulle met them and slaughtered them,
and Tarvitz and Tykus ploughed on
into the main site to confront the
industrious builder forms. Pherost
and Lodoroton followed them, firing
wide to fend off flank strikes.
Tarvitz attacked one of the monster
‘weaver’ forms, one of the
builder clades, and split its massive
belly wide open with his sword.
Molten cement poured out like pus,
and it began to claw at the sky with
its short, heavy limbs. Warrior forms
leapt over its stricken mass to
attack the Imperials. Tykus shot two
2,4,31
out of the air and then decapitated a
third as it pounced on him. The
megarachnid were everywhere, milling
like ants. Lodoroton had slain eight
of them, including another monster
clade, when a warrior form bit off
his head. As if unsatisfied with
that, the warrior form proceeded to
flense Lodoroton’s body apart with
its four limb-blades. Blood and meat
particles spumed into the cold air.
Bulle shot the warrior clade dead
with a single bolt round. It dropped
on its face. Lucius hacked his way
through the outer guards, which were
closing on him in ever increasing
numbers. He swung his sword, no
longer playing, no longer toying.
2,4,32
This was test enough. He’d killed
sixteen megarachnid by the time they
got him. A clade with spatulate
limbs, bearing a cargo of wet milky
cement, fell apart under his sword
strokes, and dying, dumped its
payload on him. Lucius fell, his arms
and legs glued together by the wet
load. He tried to break free, but the
organic mulch began to thicken and
solidify. A warrior clade pounced on
him and made to skewer him with its
four blade arms. Tarvitz shot it in
the side of the body and knocked it
away. He stood over Lucius to protect
him from the xenos scum. Bulle came
to his side, shooting  and chopping.
Pherost fought his way to join them,
2,4,33
but fell as a limb-blade punched
clean through his torso from behind.
Tykus backed up close. The three
remaining Emperor’s Children blazed
and sliced away at the enclosing foe.
At their feet, Lucius struggled to
free himself and get up. ‘Get this
off me, Saul!’ he yelled. Tarvitz
wanted to. He wanted to be able to
turn and hack free his stricken
friend, but there was no space. No
time. The megarachnid warrior clades
were all over them now, chittering
and slashing. If he broke off even
for a moment, he would be dead.
Thunder boomed in the clear night
sky. Caught up in the fierce warfare,
Tarvitz paid it no heed. Just the
2,4,34
shield-storm returning. But it
wasn’t. Meteors were dropping out
of the sky into the clearing around
them, impacting hard and super-hot in
the red dirt, like lightning strikes.
Two, four, a dozen, twenty. Drop
pods. The noise of fresh fire rang
out above the din of the fight.
Bolters boomed. Plasma weapons
shrieked. The drop pods kept falling
like bombs. ‘Look!’ Bulle cried
out. ‘Look!’ The megarachnid were
swarming over them. Tarvitz had lost
his bolter and could barely swing his
broadsword, such was the density of
enemies upon him. He felt himself
slowly being borne over by sheer
weight of numbers. ‘–hear me?’
2,4,35
The vox squealed suddenly. ‘W-what?
Say again!’ ‘I said, we are
Imperial! Do we have brothers in
there?’ ‘Yes, in the name of
Terra–’ An explosion. A series of
rapid gunshots. A shockwave rocked
through the enemy masses. ‘Follow
me in,’ a voice was yelling,
commanding and deep. ‘Follow me in
and drive them back!’ More searing
explosions. Grey bodies blew apart in
gouts of flame, spinning broken limbs
into the air like matchwood. One
whizzing limb smacked into
Tarvitz’s visor and knocked him
onto his back. The world, scarlet and
concussed, spun for a second. A hand
reached down towards Tarvitz. It swam
2,4,36
into his field of view. It was an
Astartes gauntlet. White, with black
edging.  ‘Up you come, brother.’
Tarvitz grabbed at it and felt
himself hauled upright. ‘My
thanks,’ he yelled, mayhem still
raging all around him. ‘Who are
you?’ ‘My name is Tarik,
brother,’ said his saviour.
‘Pleased to meet you.’  
2,4,37
FIVE

Informal formalities The war dogs’
rebuke I can’t say It was a little
cruel, in Loken’s opinion. Someone,
somewhere – and Loken suspected the
scheming of Maloghurst – had
omitted to tell the officers of the
140th Expedition Fleet exactly who
they were about to welcome on board.
The Vengeful Spirit , and its
attendant fleet consorts, had drawn
up majestically into high anchorage
alongside the vessels of the 140th
and the other ships that had come to
the expedition’s aid, and an
armoured heavy shuttle had
transferred from the flagship to the
2,5,1
battle-barge Misericord . Mathanual
August and his coterie of commanders,
including Eidolon’s equerry
Eshkerrus, had assembled on one of
the Misericord’s main embarkation
decks to greet the shuttle. They knew
it was bearing the commanders of the
relief task force from the 63rd
Expedition, and that inevitably meant
officers of the XVI Legion. With the
possible exception of Eshkerrus, they
were all nervous. The arrival of the
Luna Wolves, the most famed and
feared of all Astartes divisions, was
enough to tension any man’s nerve
strings. When the shuttle’s landing
ramp extended and ten Luna Wolves
descended through the clearing
2,5,2
vapour, there had been silence, and
that silence had turned to stifled
gasps when it became apparent these
were not the ten brothers of a
captain’s ceremonial detail, but
ten captains themselves in full,
formal wargear. The first captain led
the party, and made the sign of the
aquila to Mathanual August.  ‘I
am–’ he began. ‘I know who you
are, lord,’ August said, and bowed
deeply, trembling. There were few in
the Imperium who didn’t recognise
or fear First Captain Abaddon. ‘I
welcome you and–’ ‘Hush,
master,’ Abaddon said. ‘We’re
not there yet.’ August looked up,
not really understanding. Abaddon
2,5,3
stepped back into his place, and the
ten, cloaked captains, five on each
side of the landing ramp, formed an
honour guard and snapped to
attention, visors front and hands on
the pommels of their sheathed swords.
The Warmaster emerged from the
shuttle. Everyone, apart from the ten
captains and Mathanual August,
immediately prostrated themselves on
the deck. The Warmaster stepped
slowly down the ramp. His very
presence was enough to inspire total
and unreserved attention, but he was,
quite calculatedly, doing the one
thing that made matters even worse.
He wasn’t smiling. August stood
before him, his eyes wide open, his
2,5,4
mouth opening and closing wordlessly,
like a beached fish. Eshkerrus, who
had himself gone quite green, glanced
up and yanked at the hem of
August’s robes. ‘Abase yourself,
fool!’ he hissed. August
couldn’t. Loken doubted the veteran
fleet master could have even recalled
his own name at that moment. Horus
came to a halt, towering over him.
‘Sir, will you not bow?’ Horus
inquired. When August finally
replied, his voice was a tiny,
embryonic thing. ‘I can’t,’ he
said. ‘I can’t remember how.’
Then, once again, the Warmaster
showed his limitless genius for
leadership. He sank to one knee and
2,5,5
bowed to Mathanual August. ‘I have
come, as fast as I was able, to help
you, sir,’ he said. He clasped
August in an embrace. The Warmaster
was smiling now. ‘I like a man
who’s proud enough not to bend his
knees to me,’ he said. ‘I would
have bent them if I had been able, my
lord,’ August said. Already August
was calmer, gratefully put at his
ease by the War-master’s
informality. ‘Forgive me,
Mathanual… may I call you
Mathanual? Masteris so stiff. Forgive
me for not informing you that I was
coming in person. I detest pomp  and
ceremony, and if you’d known I was
coming, you’d have gone to
2,5,6
unnecessary lengths. Soldiers in
dress regs, ceremonial bands,
bunting. I particularly despise
bunting.’ Mathanual August laughed.
Horus rose to his feet and looked
around at the prone figures covering
the wide deck. ‘Rise, please.
Please. Get to your feet. A cheer or
a round of applause will do me, not
this futile grovelling.’ The fleet
officers rose, cheering
andapplauding. He’d won them over.
Just like that, thought Loken, he’d
won them over. They were his now,
forever. Horus moved forwards to
greet the officers and commanders
individually. Loken noticed
Eshkerrus, in his purple and gold
2,5,7
robes and half-armour, taking his
greeting with a bow. There was
something sour about the equerry,
Loken thought. Something definitely
put out. ‘Helms!’ Abaddon
ordered, and the company commanders
removed their helmets. They moved
forwards, more casually now, to
escort their commander through the
press of applauding figures. Horus
whispered an aside to Abaddon as he
took greeting kisses and bows from
the assembly. Abaddon nodded. He
touched his link, activating the
privy channel, and spoke, in Cthonic,
to the other three members of the
Mournival. ‘War council in thirty
minutes. Be ready to play your
2,5,8
parts.’ The other three knew what
that meant. They followed Abaddon
into the greeting crowd. They
assembled for council in the
strategium of the Misericord , a
massive rotunda situated behind the
barge’s main bridge. The Warmaster
took the seat at the head of the long
table, and the Mournival sat down
with him, along with August,
Eshkerrus and nine senior ship
commanders and army officers. The
other Luna Wolf captains sat amongst
the crowds of lesser fleet officers
filling the tiered seating in the
panelled galleries above them. Master
August called up hololithic displays
to illuminate his succinct recap of
2,5,9
the situation. Horus regarded each
one in turn, twice asking August to
go back so he could study details
again. ‘So you poured everything
you had into this death trap?’
Torgaddon began bluntly, once August
had finished. August recoiled, as if
slapped. ‘Sir, I did as–’ The
Warmaster raised his hand. ‘Tarik,
too much, too stern. Master August
was simply doing as Captain Frome
told him.’ ‘My apologies,
lord,’ Torgaddon said. ‘I
withdraw the comment.’ ‘I don’t
believe Tarik should have to,’
Abaddon cut in. ‘This was a
monumental misuse of manpower. Three
companies? Not to mention the army
2,5,10
units…’ ‘It wouldn’t have
happened under my watch,’ murmured
Torgaddon. August blinked his eyes
very fast. He looked like he was
attempting not to tear up. ‘It’s
unforgivable,’ said Aximand.
‘Simply unforgivable.’ ‘We will
forgive him, even so,’ Horus said.
‘Should we, lord?’ asked Loken.
‘I’ve shot men for less,’ said
Abaddon. ‘Please,’ August said,
pale, rising to his feet. ‘I
deserve punishment. I implore you
to–’ ‘He’s not worth the
bolt,’ muttered Aximand.
‘Enough,’ Horus smoothed.
‘Mathanual made a mistake, a
command mistake. Didn’t you,
2,5,11
Mathanual?’ ‘I believe I did,
sir.’ ‘He drip-fed his
expedition’s forces into a danger
zone until they were all gone,’
said Horus. ‘It’s tragic. It
happens sometimes. We’re here now,
that’s all that matters. Here to
rectify the problem.’ ‘What of
the Emperor’s Children?’ Loken
put in. ‘Did they not even consider
waiting?’ ‘For what, exactly?’
asked Eshkerrus. ‘For us,’ smiled
Aximand. ‘An entire expedition was
in jeopardy,’ replied Eshkerrus,
his eyes narrowing. ‘We were first
on scene. A critical response. We
owed it to our Blood Angels brothers
to–’ ‘To what? Die too?’
2,5,12
Torgaddon asked. ‘Three companies
of Blood Angels were–’ Eshkerrus
exclaimed. ‘Probably dead
already,’ Aximand interrupted.
‘They’d showed you the trap was
there. Did you just think you’d
walk into it too?’ ‘We–’
Eshkerrus began. ‘Or was Lord
Eidolon simply hungry for glory?’
asked Torgaddon. Eshkerrus rose to
his feet. He glared across the table
at Torgaddon. ‘Captain, you offend
the honour of the Emperor’s
Children.’  ‘That may indeed be
what I’m doing, yes,’ Torgaddon
replied. ‘Then, sir, you are a base
and low-born–’ ‘Equerry
Eshkerrus,’ Loken said. ‘None of
2,5,13
us like Torgaddon much, except when
he is speaking the truth. Right now,
I like him a great deal.’
‘That’s enough, Garviel,’ Horus
said quietly. ‘Enough, all of you.
Sit down, equerry. My Luna Wolves
speak harshly because they are
dismayed at this situation. An
Imperial defeat. Companies lost. An
implacable foe. This saddens me, and
it will sadden the Emperor too, when
he hears of it.’ Horus rose. ‘My
report to him will say this. Captain
Frome was right to assault this
world, for it is clearly a nest of
xenos filth. We applaud his courage.
Master August was right to support
the captain, even though it meant he
2,5,14
spent the bulk of his military
formation. Lord Commander Eidolon was
right to engage, without support, for
to do otherwise would have been
cowardly when lives were at stake. I
would also like to thank all those
commanders who rerouted here to offer
assistance. From this point on, we
will handle it.’ ‘How will you
handle it, lord?’ Eshkerrus asked
boldly. ‘Will you attack?’ asked
August. ‘We will consider our
options and inform you presently.
That’s all.’ The officers filed
out of the strategium, along with
Sedirae, Marr, Moy, Goshen, Targost
and Qruze, leaving the Warmaster
alone with the Mournival. Once they
2,5,15
were alone, Horus looked at the four
of them. ‘Thank you, friends. Well
played.’ Loken was fast learning
both how the Warmaster liked to
employ the Mournival as a political
weapon, and what a masterful
political animal the Warmaster was.
Aximand had quietly briefed Loken on
what would be required of him just
before they boarded the shuttle on
the Vengeful Spirit . ‘The
situation here is a mess, and the
commander believes that mess has in
part been caused by incompetence and
mistakes at command level. He wants
all the officers reprimanded, rebuked
so hard they smart with shame, but…
if he’s going to pull the 140th
2,5,16
Expedition back together again and
make it viable, he needs their
admiration, their respect and their
unswerving loyalty. None of which he
will have if he marches in and starts
throwing his weight around.’ ‘So
the Mournival does the rebuking for
him?’ ‘Just so,’ Aximand had
smiled. ‘The Luna Wolves are feared
anyway, so  let them fear us. Let
them hate us. We’ll be the
mouthpiece of discontent and rancour.
All accusations must come from us.
Play the part, speak as bluntly and
critically as you like. Make them
squirm in discomfort. They’ll get
the message, but at the same time,
the Warmaster will be seen as a
2,5,17
benign conciliator.’ ‘We’re his
war dogs?’ ‘So he doesn’t have
to growl himself. Exactly. He wants
us to give them hell, a dressing down
they’ll remember and learn from.
That allows him to seem the
peacemaker. To remain beloved,
adored, a voice of reason and calm.
By the end, if we do things properly,
they’ll all feel suitably
admonished, and simultaneously
they’ll all love the Warmaster for
showing mercy and calling us off.
Everyone thinks the Warmaster’s
keenest talent is as a warrior. No
one expects him to be a consummate
politician. Watch him and learn,
Garvi. Learn why the Emperor chose
2,5,18
him as his proxy.’ ‘Well played
indeed,’ Horus said to the
Mournival with a smile. ‘Garviel,
that last comment was deliciously
barbed. Eshkerrus was quite
incandescent.’ Loken nodded.
‘From the moment I laid eyes on
him, he struck me as man eager to
cover his arse. He knew mistakes had
been made.’ ‘Yes, he did,’
Horus said. ‘Just don’t expect to
find many friends amongst the
Emperor’s Children for a while.
They are a proud bunch.’ Loken
shrugged. ‘I have all the friends I
need, sir,’ he said. ‘August,
Eshkerrus and a dozen others may, of
course, be formally cautioned and
2,5,19
charged with incompetence once this
is done,’ Horus said lightly,
‘but only once this is done. Now,
morale is crucial. Now we have a war
to design.’ It was about half an
hour later when August summoned them
to the bridge. A sudden and
unexpected hole had appeared in the
shield-storms of One Forty Twenty, an
abrupt break in the fury, and quite
close to the supposed landing vectors
of the Emperor’s Children. ‘At
last,’ said August, ‘a gap in
that storm.’ ‘Would that I had
Astartes to drop into it,’
Eshkerrus muttered to himself. ‘But
you don’t, do you?’ Aximand
remarked snidely. Eshkerrus glowered
2,5,20
at Little Horus. ‘Let’s go in,’
Torgaddon urged the Warmaster.
‘Another hole might be a  long time
coming.’ ‘The storm might close
in again,’ Horus said, pointing to
the radiating cyclonics on the lith.
‘You want this world, don’t
you?’ said Torgaddon. ‘Let me
take the speartip down.’ The lots
had already been drawn. The speartip
was to be Torgaddon’s company,
along with the companies of Sedirae,
Moy and Targost. ‘Orbital
bombardment,’ Horus said, repeating
what had already been decided as the
best course of action. ‘Men might
yet live,’ Torgaddon said. The
Warmaster stepped aside, and spoke
2,5,21
quietly, in Cthonic, to the
Mournival. ‘If I authorise this, I
echo August and Eidolon, and I’ve
just had you take them to task for
that very brand of rash mistake.’
‘This is different,’ Torgaddon
replied. ‘They went in blind, wave
after wave. I’d not advocate
duplicating that stupidity, but that
break in the weather… it’s the
first they’ve detected in
months.’ ‘If there are brothers
still alive down there,’ Little
Horus said, ‘they deserve one last
chance to be found.’ ‘I’ll go
in,’ said Torgaddon. ‘See what I
can find. Any sign that the weather
is changing, I’ll pull the speartip
2,5,22
straight back out and we can open up
the fleet batteries.’ ‘I still
wonder about the music,’ the
Warmaster said. ‘Anything on
that?’ ‘The translators are still
working,’ Abaddon replied. Horus
looked at Torgaddon. ‘I admire your
compassion, Tarik, but the answer is
a firm no. I’m not going to repeat
the errors that have already been
made and pour men into–’
‘Lord?’ August had come over to
them again, and held out a data-
slate. Horus took it and read it.
‘Is this confirmed?’ ‘Yes,
Warmaster.’ Horus regarded the
Mournival. ‘The Master of Vox has
detected trace vox traffic on the
2,5,23
surface, in the area of the storm
break. It does not respond or
recognise our signals, but it is
active. Imperial. It looks like squad
to squad, or brother to brother
transmissions.’ ‘There are men
still alive,’ said Abaddon. He
seemed genuinely relieved.  ‘Great
Terra and the Emperor! There are men
still alive down there.’ Torgaddon
stared at the Warmaster steadily and
said nothing. He’d already said it.
‘Very well,’ said Horus to
Torgaddon. ‘Go.’ The drop pods
were arranged down the length of the
Vengeful Spirit’s fifth embarkation
deck in their launch racks, and the
warriors of the speartip were locking
2,5,24
themselves into place. Lid doors,
like armoured petals, were closing
around them, so the drop-pods
resembled toughened, black seed cases
ready for autumn. Klaxons sounded,
and the firing coils of the launchers
were beginning to charge. They made a
harsh, rising whine and a stink of
ozone smouldered like incense in the
deck air. The Warmaster stood at the
side of the vast deck space, watching
the hurried preparations, his arms
folded across his chest. ‘Climate
update?’ he snapped. ‘No change
in the weather break, my lord,’
Maloghurst replied, consulting his
slate. ‘How long’s it been
now?’ Horus asked. ‘Eighty-nine
2,5,25
minutes.’ ‘They’ve done a good
job pulling this together in such a
short time,’ Horus said.
‘Ezekyle, commend the unit
officers, please. Make it known I’m
proud of them.’ Abaddon nodded. He
held the papers of four oaths of
moment in his armoured hands.
‘Aximand?’ he suggested. Little
Horus stepped forwards.
‘Ezekyle?’ Loken said. ‘Could
I?’ ‘You want to?’ ‘Luc and
Serghar heard and witnessed mine
before the Whisperheads. And Tarik is
my friend.’ Abaddon looked sidelong
at the Warmaster, who gave an almost
imperceptible nod. Abaddon handed the
parchments to Loken. Loken strode out
2,5,26
across the deck, Aximand at his side,
and heard the four captains take
their oaths. Little Horus held out
the bolter on which the oaths were
sworn. When it was done, Loken handed
the oath papers to each of them.
‘Be well,’ he said to them,
‘and commend your unit commanders.
The Warmaster personally admired
their work today.’ Verulam Moy made
the sign of the aquila. ‘My thanks,
Captain Loken,’ he said, and walked
away towards his pod, shouting for
his unit seconds. Serghar Targost
smiled at Loken, and clasped his
fist, thumb around thumb. By his
side, Luc Sedirae grinned with his
ever half-open mouth, his eyes a
2,5,27
murderous blue, eager for war. ‘If
I don’t see you next on this
deck…’ Sedirae began. ‘…let
it be at the Emperor’s side,’
Loken finished. Sedirae laughed and
ran, whooping, towards his pod.
Targost locked on his helm and strode
away in the opposite direction.
‘Luc’s blood is up,’ Loken said
to Torgaddon. ‘How’s yours?’
‘My humours are all where they
should be,’ Torgaddon replied. He
hugged Loken, with a clatter of
plate, and then did the same to
Aximand. ‘Lupercal!’ he bellowed,
punching the air with his fist, and
turned away, running to his waiting
drop pod. ‘Lupercal!’ Loken and
2,5,28
Aximand shouted after him. The pair
turned and walked back to join
Abaddon, Maloghurst and the
Warmaster. ‘I’m always a little
jealous,’ Little Horus muttered to
Loken as they crossed the deck. ‘Me
too.’ ‘I always want it to be
me.’ ‘I know.’ ‘Going into
something like that.’ ‘I know.
And I’m always just a little
afraid.’ ‘Of what, Garviel?’
‘That we won’t see them again.’
‘We will.’ ‘How can you be so
sure, Horus?’ Loken wondered. ‘I
can’t say,’ replied Aximand, with
a deliberate irony that made Loken
laugh. The observing party withdrew
behind the blast shields. A sudden,
2,5,29
volatile pressure change announced
the opening of the deck’s void
fields. The firing coils accelerated
to maximum charge, shrieking with
pent up energy. ‘The word is
given,’ Abaddon instructed above
the uproar.  One by one, each with a
concussive bang, the drop pods fired
down through the deck slots like
bullets. It was like the ripple of a
full broadside firing. The
embarkation deck shuddered as the
drop pods ejected free. Then they
were all gone, and the deck was
suddenly quiet, and tiny armoured
pellets, cocooned in teardrops of
blue fire, sank away towards the
planet’s surface. I can’t say.
2,5,30
The phrase had haunted Loken since
the sixth week of the voyage to
Murder. Since he had gone with Little
Horus to the lodge meeting. The
meeting place had been one of the aft
holds of the flagship, a lonely,
forgotten pocket of the ship’s
superstructure. Down in the dark, the
way had been lit by tapers. Loken had
come in simple robes, as Aximand had
instructed him. They’d met on the
fourth midships deck, and taken the
rail carriage back to the aft
quarters before descending via dark
service stairwells. ‘Relax,’
Aximand kept telling him. Loken
couldn’t. He’d never liked the
idea of the lodges, and the discovery
2,5,31
that Jubal had been a member had
increased his disquiet. ‘This
isn’t what you think it is,’
Aximand had said. And what did he
think it was? A forbidden conclave. A
cult of the Lectitio Divinitatus. Or
worse. A terrible assembly. A worm in
the bud. A cancer at the heart of the
Legion. As he walked down the dim,
metal deckways, part of him hoped
that what awaited him would be
infernal. A coven. Proof that Jubal
had already been tainted by some
manufacture of the warp before the
Whisperheads. Proof that would reveal
a source of evil to Loken that he
could finally strike back at in open
retribution, but the greater part of
2,5,32
him willed it to be otherwise. Little
Horus Aximand was party to this
meeting. If it was tainted, then
Aximand’s presence meant that taint
ran profoundly deep. Loken didn’t
want to have to go head to head with
Aximand. If what he feared was true,
then in the next few minutes he might
have to fight and kill his Mournival
brother. ‘Who approaches?’ asked
a voice from the darkness. Loken saw
a figure, evidently an Astartes by
his build, shrouded in a hooded
cloak. ‘Two souls,’ Aximand
replied.  ‘What are your names?’
the figure asked. ‘I can’t
say.’ ‘Pass, friends.’ They
entered the aft hold. Loken
2,5,33
hesitated. The vast, scaffold-framed
area was eerily lit by candles and a
vigorous fire in a metal canister.
Dozens of hooded figures stood
around. The dancing light made weird
shadows of the deep hold’s
structural architecture. ‘A new
friend comes,’ Aximand announced.
The hooded figures turned. ‘Let him
show the sign,’ said one of them in
a voice that seemed familiar. ‘Show
it,’ Aximand whispered to Loken.
Loken slowly held out the medal
Aximand had given him. It glinted in
the fire light. Inside his robe, his
other hand clasped the grip of the
combat knife he had concealed. ‘Let
him be revealed,’ a voice said.
2,5,34
Aximand reached over and drew
Loken’s hood down. ‘Welcome,
brother warrior,’ the others said
as one. Aximand pulled down his own
hood. ‘I speak for him,’ he said.
‘Your voice is noted. Is he come of
his own free will?’ ‘He is come
because I invited him.’ ‘No more
secrecy,’ the voice said. The
figures removed their hoods and
showed their faces in the glow of the
candles. Loken blinked. There was
Torgaddon, Luc Sedirae, Nero Vipus,
Kalus Ekaddon, Verulam Moy and two
dozen other senior and junior
Astartes. And Serghar Targost, the
hidden voice. Evidently the lodge
master. ‘You’ll not need the
2,5,35
blade,’ Targost said gently,
stepping forwards and holding out his
hand for it. ‘You are free to leave
at any time, unmolested. May I take
it from you? Weapons are not
permitted within the bounds of our
meetings.’ Loken took out the
combat knife and passed it to
Targost. The lodge master placed it
on a wall strut, out of the way.
Loken continued to look from one face
to another. This wasn’t like
anything he had expected.
‘Tarik?’ ‘We’ll answer any
question, Garviel,’ Torgaddon said.
‘That’s why we  brought you
here.’ ‘We’d like you to join
us,’ said Aximand, ‘but if you
2,5,36
choose not to, we will respect that
too. All we ask, either way, is that
you say nothing about what and who
you see here to anyone outside.’
Loken hesitated. ‘Or… ’
‘It’s not a threat,’ said
Aximand. ‘Nor even a condition.
Simply a request that you respect our
privacy.’ ‘We’ve known for a
long time,’ Targost said, ‘that
you have no interest in the warrior
lodge.’ ‘I’d perhaps have put
it more strongly than that,’ said
Loken. Targost shrugged. ‘We
understand the nature of your
opposition. You’re far from being
the only Astartes to feel that way.
That is why we’ve never made any
2,5,37
attempt to induct you.’ ‘What’s
changed?’ asked Loken. ‘You
have,’ said Aximand. ‘You’re
not just a company officer now, but a
Mournival lord. And the fact of the
lodge has come to your attention.’
‘Jubal’s medal…’ said Loken.
‘Jubal’s medal,’ nodded
Aximand. ‘Jubal’s death was a
terrible thing, which we all mourn,
but it affected you more than anyone.
We see how you strive to make amends,
to whip your company into tighter and
finer form, as you blame yourself.
When the medal turned up, we were
concerned that you might start to
make waves. That you might start
asking open questions about the
2,5,38
lodge.’ ‘So this is self-
interest?’ Loken asked. ‘You
thought you’d gang up on me and
force me into silence?’
‘Garviel,’ said Luc Sedirae,
‘the last thing the Luna Wolves
need is an honest and respected
captain, a member of the Mournival no
less, campaigning to expose the
lodge. It would damage the entire
Legion.’ ‘Really?’ ‘Of
course,’ said Sedirae. ‘The
agitations of a man like you would
force the Warmaster to act.’ ‘And
he doesn’t want to do that,’
Torgaddon said. ‘He… knows?’
Loken asked. ‘You seemed
shocked,’ said Aximand.
2,5,39
‘Wouldn’t you be more shocked to
learn the Warmaster didn’tknow
about the quiet order within his
Legion? He knows. He’s always
known, and he turns a blind eye,
provided we remain  closed and
confidential in our activities.’
‘I don’t understand…’ Loken
said. ‘That’s why you’re
here,’ said Moy. ‘You speak out
against us because you don’t
understand. If you wish to oppose
what we do, then at least do so from
an informed position.’ ‘I’ve
heard enough,’ said Loken, turning
away. ‘I’ll leave now. Don’t
worry, I’ll say nothing. I’ll
make no waves, but I’m disappointed
2,5,40
in you all. Someone can return my
blade to me tomorrow.’
‘Please,’ Aximand began. ‘No,
Horus! You meet in secret, and
secrecy is the enemy of truth. So we
are taught! Truth is everything we
have! You hide yourselves, you
conceal your identities… for what?
Because you are ashamed? Hell’s
teeth, you should be! The Emperor
himself, beloved by all, has ruled on
this. He does not sanction this kind
of activity!’ ‘Because he
doesn’t understand!’ Torgaddon
exclaimed. Loken turned back and
strode across the chamber until he
was nose to nose with Torgaddon. ‘I
can hardly believe I heard you say
2,5,41
that,’ he snarled. ‘It’s
true,’ said Torgaddon, not backing
down. ‘The Emperor isn’t a god,
but he might as well be. He’s so
far removed from the rest of mankind.
Unique. Singular. Who does he call
brother? No one! Even the blessed
primarchs are only sons to him. The
Emperor is wise beyond all measure,
and we love him and would follow him
until the crack of doom, but he
doesn’t understand brotherhood, and
that is all we meet for.’ There was
silence for a moment. Loken turned
away from Torgaddon, unwilling to
look upon his face. The others stood
in a ring around them. ‘We are
warriors,’ said Targost. ‘That is
2,5,42
all we know and all we do. Duty and
war, war and duty. Thus it has been
since we were created. The only bond
we have that is not prescribed by
duty is that of brotherhood.’
‘That is the purpose of the
lodge,’ said Sedirae. ‘To be a
place where we are free to meet and
converse and confide, outside the
strictures of rank and martial order.
There is only one qualification a man
needs to be a part of our quiet
order. He must be a warrior.’ ‘In
this company,’ said Targost, ‘a
man of any rank can meet and speak
openly of his troubles, his doubts,
his ideas, his dreams, without fear
of scorn, or monition from a
2,5,43
commanding officer. This is a
sanctuary for our spirit as men.’
‘Look around,’ Aximand invited,
stepping forwards, gesturing with his
hands. ‘Look at these faces,
Garviel. Company captains, sergeants,
file warriors. Where else could such
a mix of men meet as equals? We leave
our ranks at the door when we come
in. Here, a senior commander can talk
with a junior initiate, man to man.
Here, knowledge and experience is
passed on, ideas are circulated,
commonalities discovered. Serghar
holds the office of lodge master only
so that a function of order may be
maintained.’ Targost nodded.
‘Horus is right. Garviel, do you
2,5,44
know how old the quiet order is?’
‘Decades…’ ‘No, older.
Perhaps thousands of years older.
There have been lodges in the Legions
since their inception, and allied
orders in the army and all other
branches of the martial divisions.
The lodge can be traced back into
antiquity, before even the
Unification Wars. It’s not a cult,
nor a religious obscenity. Just a
fraternity of warriors. Some Legions
do not practise the habit. Some do.
Ours always has done. It lends us
strength.’ ‘How?’ asked Loken.
‘By connecting warriors otherwise
divorced by rank or station. It makes
bonds between men who would otherwise
2,5,45
not even know one another’s name.
We thrive, like all Legions, from our
firm hierarchy of formal authority,
the loyalty that flows down from a
commander through to his lowest
soldier. Loyal to a squad, to a
section, to a company. The lodge
reinforces complementary links
acrossthat structure, from squad to
squad, company to company. It could
be said to be our secret weapon. It
is the true strength of the Luna
Wolves, strapping us together, side
to side, where we are already bound
up top to toe.’ ‘You have a dozen
spears to carry into war,’ said
Torgaddon quietly. ‘You gather
them, shaft to shaft, as a bundle, so
2,5,46
they are easier to bear. How much
easier is that bundle to carry if it
is tied together around the
shafts?’ ‘If that was a
metaphor,’ Loken said, ‘it was
lousy.’ ‘Let me speak,’ said
another man. It was Kalus Ekaddon. He
stepped forwards to face Loken.
‘There’s been bad blood between
us, Loken,’ he said bluntly.
‘There has.’ ‘A little matter
of rivalry on the field. I admit it.
After the High City fight, I hated
your guts. So, in the field, though
we served the same master and
followed the same standard, there’d
always be friction between us.
Competition. Am I right?’ ‘I
2,5,47
suppose…’ ‘I’ve never spoken
to you,’ Ekaddon said. ‘Never,
informally. We don’t meet or mix.
But I tell you this much: I’ve
heard you tonight, in this place,
amongst friends. I’ve heard you
stand up for your beliefs and your
point of view, and I’ve learned
respect for you. You speak your mind.
You have principles. Tomorrow, Loken,
no matter what you decide tonight,
I’ll see you in a new light.
You’ll not get any grief from me
any more, because I know you now.
I’ve seen you as the man you
are.’ He laughed, raw and loud.
‘Terra, it’s a crude example,
Loken, for I’m a crude fellow, but
2,5,48
it shows what the lodge can do.’ He
held out his hand. After a moment,
Loken took it. ‘There’s a thing
at least,’ said Ekaddon. ‘Now get
on, if you’re going. We’ve
talking and drinking to do.’ ‘Or
will you stay?’ asked Torgaddon.
‘For now, perhaps,’ said Loken.
The meeting lasted for two hours.
Torgaddon had brought wine, and
Sedirae produced some meat and bread
from the flagship’s commissary.
There were no crude rituals or
daemonic practices to observe. The
men – the brothers – sat around
and talked in small groups, then
listened as Aximand recounted the
details of a xenos war that he had
2,5,49
participated in, which he hoped might
give them insight into the fight
ahead. Afterwards, Torgaddon told
some jokes, most of them bad. As
Torgaddon rambled on with a
particularly involved and vulgar
tale, Aximand came over to Loken.
‘Where do you suppose,’ he began
quietly, ‘the notion of the
Mournival came from?’ ‘From
this?’ Loken asked. Aximand nodded.
‘The Mournival has no legitimate
standing or powers. It’s simply an
informal organ, but the Warmaster
would not be without it. It was
created originally as a visible
extension of the invisible lodge,
though that link has long since gone.
2,5,50
They’re both informal bodies
interlaced into the very formal
structures of our lives. For the
benefit of all, I believe.’  ‘I
imagined so many horrors about the
lodge,’ said Loken. ‘I know. All
part of that straight up and down
thing you do so well, Garvi. It’s
why we love you. And the lodge would
like to embrace you.’ ‘Will there
be formal vows? All the theatrical
rigmarole of the Mournival?’
Aximand laughed. ‘No! If you’re
in, you’re in. There are only very
simple rules. You don’t talk about
what passes between us here to any
not of the lodge. This is downtime.
Free time. The men, especially the
2,5,51
junior ranks, need to be confident
they can speak freely without any
comeback. You should hear what some
of them say.’ ‘I think I might
like to.’ ‘That’s good.
You’ll be given a medal to carry,
just as a token. And if anyone asks
you about any lodge confidence, the
answer is “I can’t say”.
There’s nothing else really.’
‘I’ve misjudged this thing,’
Loken said. ‘I made it quite a
daemon in my head, imagining the
worst.’ ‘I understand.
Particularly given the matter of poor
Jubal. And given your own staunch
character.’ ‘Am I… to replace
Jubal?’ ‘It’s not a matter of
2,5,52
replacement,’ Little Horus said,
‘and anyway, no. Jubal was a
member, though he hadn’t attended
any meetings in years. That’s why
we forgot to palm away his medal
before your inspection. There’s
your danger sign, Garvi. Not that
Jubal was a member, but that he was a
member and had seldom attended. We
didn’t know what was going on in
his head. If he’d come to us and
shared, we might have pre-empted the
horror you endured at the
Whisperheads.’ ‘But you told me I
was to replace someone,’ Loken
said. ‘Yes. Udon. We miss him.’
‘Udon was a lodge member?’
Aximand nodded. ‘A long-time
2,5,53
brother, and, by the way, go easy on
Vipus.’ Loken went over to where
Nero Vipus was sitting, beside the
canister fire. The lively yellow
flames jumped into the dark air and
sent stray sparks oscillating away
into the black. Vipus looked
uncomfortable, toying with the heal-
seam of his new hand. ‘Nero?’
‘Garviel. I was bracing myself for
this.’  ‘Why?’ ‘Because
you… because you didn’t want
anyone in your command to…’ ‘As
I understand it,’ Loken said,
‘and forgive me if I’m wrong,
because I’m new to this, but as I
understand it, the lodge is a place
for free speech and openness. Not
2,5,54
discomfort.’ Nero smiled and
nodded. ‘I was a member of the
lodge long before I came into your
command. I respected your wishes, but
I couldn’t leave the brotherhood. I
kept it hidden. Sometimes, I thought
about asking you to join, but I knew
you’d hate me for it.’
‘You’re the best friend I
have,’ Loken said. ‘I couldn’t
hate you for anything.’ ‘The
medal though. Jubal’s medal. When
you found it, you wouldn’t let the
matter go.’ ‘And all you said was
“I can’t say”. Spoken like a
true lodge member.’ Nero sniggered.
‘By the way,’ Loken said. ‘It
was you, wasn’t it?’ ‘What?’
2,5,55
‘Who took Jubal’s medal.’ ‘I
told Captain Aximand about your
interest, just so he knew, but no,
Garvi. I didn’t take the medal.’
When the meeting closed, Loken walked
away along one of the vast service
tunnels that ran the length of the
ship’s bilges. Water dripped from
the rusted roof, and oil rainbows
shone on the dirty lakes across the
deck. Torgaddon ran to catch up with
him. ‘Well?’ he asked. ‘I was
surprised to see you there,’ said
Loken. ‘I was surprised to see you
there,’ Torgaddon replied. ‘A
starch-arse like you?’ Loken
laughed. Torgaddon ran ahead and
leapt up to slap his palm against a
2,5,56
pipe high overhead. He landed with a
splash. Loken chuckled, shook his
head, and did the same, slapping
higher than Torgaddon had managed.
The pipe clang echoed away from them
down the tunnel. ‘Under the
engineerium,’ Torgaddon said,
‘the ducts are twice as high, but
I can touch them.’ ‘You lie.’
‘I’ll prove it.’ ‘We’ll
see.’ They walked on for a while.
Torgaddon whistled the Legion March
loudly and tunelessly. ‘Nothing to
say?’ he asked at length. ‘About
what?’ ‘Well, about that.’ ‘I
was misinformed. I understand better
now.’ ‘And?’ Loken stopped and
looked at Torgaddon. ‘I have only
2,5,57
one worry,’ he said. ‘The lodge
meets in secret, so, logically, it is
good at keeping itself secret. I have
a problem with secrets.’ ‘Which
is?’ ‘If you get good at keeping
them, who knows what kind you’ll
end up keeping.’ Torgaddon
maintained a straight face for as
long as possible and then exploded in
laughter. ‘No good,’ he
spluttered. ‘I can’t help it.
You’re so straight up and down.’
Loken smiled, but his voice was
serious. ‘So you keep telling me,
but I mean it, Tarik. The lodge hides
itself so well. It’s become used to
hiding things. Imagine what it could
hide if it wanted to.’ ‘The fact
2,5,58
that you’re a starch-arse?’
Torgaddon asked. ‘I think that’s
common knowledge.’ ‘It is. It so
is!’ Torgaddon chuckled. He paused.
‘So… will you attend again?’
‘I can’t say,’ Loken replied.

2,5,59
SIX
 Chosen instrument Rare picts The
Emperor protects Four full companies
of the Luna Wolves had dropped into
the clearing, and the megarachnid
forces had perished beneath their
rapacious onslaught, those that had
not fled back into the shivering
forests. A block of smoke, as black
and vast as a mountainside, hung over
the battlefield in the cold night
air. Xenos bodies covered the ground,
curled and shrivelled like metal
shavings. ‘Captain Torgaddon,’
the Luna Wolf said, introducing
himself formally and making the sign
of the aquila. ‘Captain Tarvitz,’
Tarvitz responded. ‘My thanks and
2,6,1
respect for your intervention.’
‘The honour’s mine, Tarvitz,’
Torgaddon said. He glanced around the
smouldering field. ‘Did you really
assault here with only six men?’
‘It was the only workable option in
the circumstances,’ Tarvitz
replied. Nearby, Bulle was freeing
Lucius from the wad of megarachnid
cement. ‘Are you alive?’
Torgaddon asked, looking over. Lucius
nodded sullenly, and set himself
apart while he picked the scabs of
cement off his perfect armour.
Torgaddon regarded him for a moment,
then turned his attention to the vox
intel. ‘How many with you?’
Tarvitz asked. ‘A speartip,’ said
2,6,2
Torgaddon. ‘Four companies. A
moment, please. Second Company, form
up on me! Luc, secure the perimeter.
Bring up the heavies. Serghar, cover
the left flank! Verulam… I’m
waiting! Front up the right wing.’
The vox crackled back. ‘Who’s the
commander here?’ a voice demanded.
‘I am,’ said Torgaddon, swinging
round. Flanked by a dozen of the
Emperor’s Children, the tall, proud
figure of Lord Eidolon crunched
towards them across the fuming white
slag. ‘I am Eidolon,’ he said,
facing Torgaddon. ‘Torgaddon.’
‘Under the circumstances,’
Eidolon said, ‘I’ll understand if
you don’t bow.’ ‘I can’t for
2,6,3
the life of me imagine any
circumstances in which I would,’
Torgaddon replied. Eidolon’s
bodyguards wrenched out their combat
blades. ‘What did you say?’
demanded one. ‘I said you boys
should put those pig sticks away
before I hurt somebody with them.’
Eidolon raised his hand and the men
sheathed their swords. ‘I
appreciate your intervention,
Torgaddon, for the situation was
grave. Also, I understand that the
Luna Wolves are not bred like proper
men, with proper manners. So I’ll
overlook your comment.’ ‘That’s
CaptainTorgaddon,’ Torgaddon
replied. ‘If I insulted you, in any
2,6,4
way, let me assure you, I meant
to.’ ‘Face to face with me,’
Eidolon growled, and tore off his
helm, forcing his genhanced biology
to cope with the atmosphere and the
radioactive wind. Torgaddon did the
same. They stared into each other’s
eyes. Tarvitz watched the
confrontation in mounting disbelief.
He’d never seen anyone stand up to
Lord Eidolon. The pair were
chestplate to chestplate, Eidolon
slightly taller. Torgaddon seemed to
be smirking. ‘How would you like
this to go, Eidolon?’ Torgaddon
inquired. ‘Would you, perhaps, like
to go home with your head stuck up
your arse?’ ‘You are a base-born
2,6,5
cur,’ Eidolon hissed. ‘Just so
you know,’ replied Torgaddon,
‘you’ll have to do an awful lot
better than that. I’m a base-born
cur and proud of it. You know what
that is?’ He pointed up at one of
the stars above them. ‘A star?’
asked Eidolon, momentarily wrong-
footed. ‘Yes, probably. I haven’t
the faintest idea. The point is,
I’m the designated commander of the
Luna Wolves speartip, come to rescue
your sorry  backsides. I do this by
warrant of the Warmaster himself.
He’s up there, in one of those
stars, and right now he thinks
you’re a cretin. And he’ll tell
Fulgrim so, next time he meets
2,6,6
him.’ ‘Do not speak my
primarch’s name so irreverently,
you bastard. Horus will–’
‘There you go again,’ Torgaddon
sighed, pushing Eidolon away from him
with a two-handed shove to the
lord’s breastplate. ‘He’s the
Warmaster.’ Another shove. ‘The
Warmaster. YourWarmaster. Show some
cursed respect.’ Eidolon hesitated.
‘I, of course, recognise the
majesty of the Warmaster.’ ‘Do
you? Do you, Eidolon? Well, that’s
good, because I’m it. I’m his
chosen instrument here. You’ll
address me as if I were the
Warmaster. You’ll show me some
respect too! Warmaster Horus believes
2,6,7
you’ve made some shit-awful
mistakes in your prosecution of this
theatre. How many brothers did you
drop here? A company? How many left?
Serghar? Head count?’ ‘Thirty-
nine live ones, Tarik,’ the vox
answered. ‘There may be more. Lots
of body piles to dig through.’
‘Thirty-nine. You were so hungry
for glory you wasted more than half a
company. If I was… PrimarchFulgrim,
I’d have your head on a pole. The
Warmaster may yet decide to do just
that. So, LordEidolon, are we
clear?’ ‘We…’ Eidolon replied
slowly, ‘… are clear, captain.’
‘Perhaps you’d like to go and
undertake a review of your forces?’
2,6,8
Torgaddon suggested. ‘The enemy
will be back soon, I’m sure, and in
greater numbers.’ Eidolon gazed
venomously at Torgaddon for a few
seconds and then replaced his helm.
‘I will not forget this insult,
captain,’ he said. ‘Then it was
worth the trip,’ Torgaddon replied,
clamping on his own helmet. Eidolon
crunched away, calling to his
scattered troops. Torgaddon turned
and found Tarvitz looking at him.
‘What’s on your mind, Tarvitz?’
he asked. Tarvitz wished to say. Out
I’ve been wanting to say that for a
long time, loud, he said, ‘What do
you need me to do?’ ‘Gather up
your squad and stand ready. When the
2,6,9
shit comes down next, I’d like to
know you’re with me.’ Tarvitz
made the sign of the aquila across
his chest. ‘You can count on it.
How did you know where to drop?’
Torgaddon pointed at the calm sky.
‘We came in where the storm had
gone out,’ he said. Tarvitz hoisted
Lucius to his feet. Lucius was still
picking at his ruined armour. ‘That
Torgaddon is an odious rogue,’ he
said. Lucius had overheard the entire
confrontation. ‘I rather like
him.’ ‘The way he spoke to our
lord? He’s a dog.’ ‘I like
dogs,’ Tarvitz said. ‘I believe I
will kill him for his insolence.’
‘Don’t,’ Tarvitz said. ‘That
2,6,10
would be wrong, and I’d have to
hurt you if you did.’ Lucius
laughed, as if Tarvitz had said
something funny. ‘I mean it,’
Tarvitz said. Lucius laughed even
more. It took a little under an hour
to assemble their forces in the
clearing. Torgaddon established
contact with the fleet via the
astrotelepath he had brought with
him. The shield-storms raged with
dreadful fury over the surrounding
stalk forests, but the sky directly
above the clearing remained calm. As
he marshalled the remains of his
force, Tarvitz observed Torgaddon and
his fellow captains conducting a
further angry debate with Eidolon and
2,6,11
Anteus. There were apparently some
differences of opinion as to what
their course of action should be.
After a while, Torgaddon walked away
from the argument. Tarvitz guessed he
was recusing himself from the quarrel
before he said something else to
infuriate Eidolon. Torgaddon walked
the line of the picket, stopping to
talk to some of his men, and finally
arrived at Tarvitz’s position.
‘You seem like a decent sort,
Tarvitz,’ he remarked. ‘How do
you stand that lord of yours?’
‘It is my duty to stand him,’
Tarvitz replied. ‘It is my duty to
serve. He is  my lord commander. His
combat record is glorious.’ ‘I
2,6,12
doubt he’ll be adding this
endeavour to his triumph roll,’
Torgaddon said. ‘Tell me, did you
agree with his decision to drop
here?’ ‘I neither agreed nor
disagreed,’ Tarvitz replied. ‘I
obeyed. He is my lord commander.’
‘I know that.’ Torgaddon sighed.
‘All right, just between you and
me, Tarvitz. Brother to brother. Did
you like the decision?’ ‘I
really–’ ‘Oh, come on. I just
saved your life. Answer me candidly
and we’ll call it quits.’ Tarvitz
hesitated. ‘I thought it a little
reckless,’ he admitted. ‘I
thought it was prompted by ambitious
notions that had little to do with
2,6,13
the safety of our company or the
salvation of the missing forces.’
‘Thank you for speaking
honestly.’ ‘May I speak honestly
a little more?’ Tarvitz asked.
‘Of course.’ ‘I admire you,
sir,’ Tarvitz said. ‘For both
your courage and your plain speaking.
But please, remember that we are the
Emperor’s Children, and we are very
proud. We do not like to be shown up,
or belittled, nor do we like
others… even other Astartes of the
most noble Legions… diminishing
us.’ ‘When you say “we” you
mean Eidolon?’ ‘No, I mean we.’
‘Very diplomatic,’ said
Torgaddon. ‘In the early days of
2,6,14
the crusade, the Emperor’s Children
fought alongside us for a time,
before you had grown enough in
numbers to operate autonomously.’
‘I know, sir. I was there, but I
was just a file trooper back then.’
‘Then you’ll know the esteem with
which the Luna Wolves regarded your
Legion. I was a junior officer back
then too, but I remember distinctly
that Horus said… what was it? That
the Emperor’s Children were the
living embodiment of the Adeptus
Astartes. Horus enjoys a special bond
with your primarch. The Luna Wolves
have cooperated militarily with just
about every other Legion during this
great war. We still regard yours as
2,6,15
about the best we’ve ever had the
honour of serving with.’ ‘It
pleases me to hear you say so,
sir,’ Tarvitz replied. ‘Then…
how have you changed so?’ Torgaddon
asked. ‘Is Eidolon typical of the
command echelon that rules you now?
His arrogance astounds me. So  damned
superior…’ ‘Our ethos is not
about superiority, captain,’
Tarvitz answered. ‘It is about
purity. But one is often mistaken for
the other. We model ourselves on the
Emperor, beloved by all, and in
seeking to be like him, we can seem
aloof and haughty.’ ‘Did you ever
think,’ asked Torgaddon, ‘that
while it’s laudable to emulate the
2,6,16
Emperor as much as possible, the one
thing that you cannot and should not
aspire to is his supremacy? He is the
Emperor. He is singular. Strive to be
like him in all ways, by all means,
but do not presume to be on his
level. No one belongs there. No one
is alike to him.’ ‘My Legion
understands that,’ Tarvitz said.
‘Sometimes, though, it doesn’t
translate well to others.’
‘There’s no purity in pride,’
Torgaddon said. ‘Nothing pure or
admirable in arrogance or over-
confidence.’ ‘My lord Eidolon
knows this.’ ‘He should show he
knows it. He led you into a disaster,
and he won’t even apologise for
2,6,17
it.’ ‘I’m sure, in due course,
my lord will formally acknowledge
your efforts in relieving us
and–’ ‘I don’t want any
credit,’ Torgaddon said. ‘You
were brothers in trouble, and we came
to help. That’s the start and
finish of it. But I had to face down
the Warmaster to get permission to
drop, because he believed it was
insanity to send any more men to
their deaths in an unknowable place
against an unknowable foe. That’s
what Eidolon did. In the name, I
imagine, of honour and pride.’
‘How did you convince the
Warmaster?’ Tarvitz wondered. ‘I
didn’t,’ said Torgaddon. ‘You
2,6,18
did. The storm had gone out over this
area, and we detected your vox
scatter. You proved you were still
alive down here, and the Warmaster
immediately sanctioned the speartip
to come and pull you out.’
Torgaddon looked up at the misty
stars. ‘The storms are their best
weapon,’ he mused. ‘If we’re
going to wrestle this world to
compliance, we’ll have to find a
way to beat them. Eidolon suggested
the trees might be key. That they
might act as generators or amplifiers
for the storm. He said that once
he’d destroyed the trees, the storm
in this locality collapsed.’
Tarvitz paused. ‘My Lord Eidolon
2,6,19
said that?’  ‘Only piece of sense
I’ve heard out of him. He said that
as soon as he set charges to the
trees and demolished them, the storm
went out. It’s an interesting
theory. The Warmaster wants me to use
the storm-break to pull everyone here
out, but Eidolon is dead set on
finding more trees and levelling
them, in the hope that we can break a
hole in the enemy’s cover. What do
you think?’ ‘I think… my Lord
Eidolon is wise,’ said Tarvitz.
Bulle had been stationed nearby, and
had overheard the exchange. He could
not contain himself any longer.
‘Permission to speak, captain,’
he said. ‘Not now, Bulle,’
2,6,20
Tarvitz said. ‘Sir, I–’ ‘You
heard him, Bulle,’ Lucius cut in,
walking up to them. ‘What’s your
name, brother?’ Torgaddon asked.
‘Bulle, sir.’ ‘What did you
want to say?’ ‘It’s not
important,’ Lucius snorted.
‘Brother Bulle speaks out of
turn.’ ‘You are Lucius, right?’
Torgaddon asked. ‘Captain
Lucius.’ ‘And Bulle was one of
the men who stood over you and fought
to keep you alive?’ ‘He did. I am
honoured by his service.’ ‘Maybe
you could let him talk, then?’
Torgaddon suggested. ‘It would be
inappropriate,’ said Lucius.
‘Tell you what,’ Torgaddon said.
2,6,21
‘As commander of the speartip, I
believe I have authority here. I’ll
decide who talks and who doesn’t.
Bulle? Let’s hear you, brother.’
Bulle looked awkwardly at Lucius and
Tarvitz. ‘That was an order,’
said Torgaddon. ‘My Lord Eidolon
did not destroy the trees, sir.
Captain Tarvitz did it. He insisted.
My Lord Eidolon then chastised him
for the act, claiming it was a waste
of charges.’ ‘Is this true?’
Torgaddon asked. ‘Yes,’ said
Tarvitz. ‘Why did you do it?’
‘Because it didn’t seem right for
the bodies of our dead to hang in
such  ignominy,’ Tarvitz said.
‘And you’d let Eidolon take the
2,6,22
credit and not say anything?’ ‘He
is my lord.’ ‘Thank you,
brother,’ Torgaddon said to Bulle.
He glanced at Lucius. ‘Reprimand
him or punish him in any way for
speaking out and I’ll have the
Warmaster himself personally deprive
you of your rank.’ Torgaddon turned
to Tarvitz. ‘It’s a funny thing.
It shouldn’t matter, but it does.
Now I know you felled the trees, I
feel better about pursuing that line
of action. Eidolon clearly knows a
good idea when someone else has it.
Let’s go cut down a few more trees,
Tarvitz. You can show me how it’s
done.’ Torgaddon walked away,
shouting out orders for muster and
2,6,23
movement. Tarvitz and Lucius
exchanged long looks, and then Lucius
turned and walked away. The armed
force moved away from the clearing
and back into the thickets of the
stalk forest. They passed back into
the embrace of the storm cover.
Torgaddon had his Terminator squads
lead the way. The man-tanks, under
the command of Trice Rokus, ignited
their heavy blades, and cut a path,
felling the stalks to clear a wide
avenue into the forest swathe. They
pressed on beneath the wild storms
for twenty kilometres. Twice,
megarachnid skirmish parties
assaulted their lines, but the
speartip drew its phalanxes close
2,6,24
and, with the advantage of range
created by the cleared avenue,
slaughtered the attackers with their
bolters. The landscape began to
change. They were apparently reaching
the edge of a vast plateau, and the
ground began to slope away steeply
before them. The stalk growth became
more patchy and sparse, clinging to
the rocky, ferrous soil of the
descent. A wide basin spread out
below them, a rift valley. Here, the
spongy, marshy ground was covered
with thousands of small, coned trees,
rising some ten metres high, which
dotted the terrain like fungal
growths. The trees, hard and stony
and composed of the same milky cement
2,6,25
from which the murder trees had been
built, peppered the depression like
armour studs. As they descended onto
it, the Astartes found the land at
the base of the rift swampy and
slick, decorated with long, thin
lakes of water stained orange by the
iron content of the soil. The flash
of the overhead storms scintillated
in reflection from the long, slender
pools. They looked like claw wounds
in the  earth. The air was busy with
fibrous grey bugs that milled and
swirled interminably in the stagnant
atmosphere. Larger flying things,
flitting like bats, hunted the bugs
in quick, sharp swoops. At the mouth
of the rift, they discovered six more
2,6,26
thorn trees arranged in a silent
grove. Reduced cadavers and residual
meat and armour adorned their barbs.
Blood Angels, and Imperial army.
There was no sign of the winged
clades, though fifty kilometres away,
over the stalk forests, black shapes
could be seen, circling madly in the
lightning-washed sky. ‘Lay them
low,’ Torgaddon ordered. Moy nodded
and began to gather munitions.
‘Find Captain Tarvitz,’ Torgaddon
called. ‘He’ll show you how to do
it.’ Loken remained on the
strategium for the first three hours
after the drop, long enough to
celebrate Torgaddon’s signal from
the surface. The speartip had secured
2,6,27
the dropsite, and formed up with the
residue of Lord Eidolon’s company.
After that, the atmosphere had
become, strangely, more tense. They
were waiting to hear Torgaddon’s
field decision. Abaddon, cautious and
closed, had already ordered
Stormbirds prepped for extraction
flights. Aximand paced, silently. The
Warmaster had withdrawn into his
sanctum with Maloghurst. Loken leant
at the strategium rail for a while,
overlooking the bustle of the vast
bridge below, and discussed tactics
with Tybalt Marr. Marr and Moy were
both Sons of Horus, cast in his image
so firmly that they looked like
identical twins. At some point in the
2,6,28
Legion’s history, they had earned
the nicknames ‘the Either’ and
the ‘the Or’, referring to the
fact that they were almost
interchangeable. It was often hard to
distinguish between them, they were
so alike. One might do as well as the
other. Both were competent field
officers, with a rack of victories
each that would make any captain
proud, though neither had attained
the glories of Sedirae or Abaddon.
They were precise, efficient and
workmanlike in their leadership, but
they were Luna Wolves, and what was
workmanlike to that fratery was
exemplary to any other regiment. As
Marr spoke, it became clear to Loken
2,6,29
that he was envious of his
‘twin’s’ selection to the
undertaking. It was Horus’s habit
to send both or neither.  They worked
well together, complementing one
another, as if somehow anticipating
one another’s decisions, but the
ballot for the speartip had been
democratic and fair. Moy had won a
place. Marr had not. Marr rattled on
to Loken, evidently sublimating his
worries about his brother’s fate.
After a while, Qruze came over to
join them at the rail. Iacton Qruze
was an anachronism. Ancient and
rather tiresome, he had been a
captain in the Legion since its
inception, his prominence entirely
2,6,30
eclipsed once Horus had been
repatriated and given command by the
Emperor. He was the product of
another era, a throwback to the years
of the Unification Wars and the bad
old times, stubborn and slightly
cantankerous, a vestigial trace of
the way the Legion had gone about
things in antiquity. ‘Brothers,’
he greeted them as he came up. Qruze
still had a habit, perhaps
unconscious, of making the salute of
the single clenched fist against his
breast, the old pre-Unity symbol,
rather than the double-handed eagle.
He had a long, tanned face, deeply
lined with creases and folds, and his
hair was white. He spoke softly,
2,6,31
expecting others to make the effort
to listen, and believed that it was
his quiet tone that had, over the
years, earned him the nickname ‘the
Half-heard’. Loken knew this
wasn’t so. Qruze’s wits were not
as sharp as they’d once been, and
he often appeared tired or
inappropriate in his commentary or
advice. He was known as ‘the Half-
heard’ because his pronouncements
were best not listened to too
closely. Qruze believed he stood as a
wise father-figure to the Legion, and
no one had the spite to inform him
otherwise. There had been several
quiet attempts to deprive him of
company command, just as Qruze had
2,6,32
made several attempts to become
elected to the first captaincy. By
duration of service, he should have
been so long since. Loken believed
that the Warmaster regarded Qruze
with some pity and couldn’t abide
the idea of retiring him. Qruze was
an irksome relic, regarded by the
rest of them with equal measures of
affection and frustration, who could
not accept that the Legion had
matured and advanced without him.
‘We will be out of this in a
day,’ he announced categorically to
Loken and Marr. ‘You mark my words,
young men. A day, and the commander
will order extraction.’ ‘Tarik is
doing well,’ Loken began. ‘The
2,6,33
boy Torgaddon has been lucky, but he
cannot press this to a  conclusion.
You mark my words. In and out, in a
day.’ ‘I wish I was down
there,’ Marr said. ‘Foolish
thoughts,’ Qruze decided. ‘It’s
only a rescue run. I cannot for the
life of me imagine what the
Emperor’s Children thought they
were doing, going into this hell. I
served with them, in the early days,
you know? Fine fellows. Very proper.
They taught the Wolves a thing or two
about decorum, thank you very much!
Model soldiers. Put us to shame on
the Eastern Fringe, so they did, but
that was back then.’ ‘It
certainly was,’ said Loken. ‘It
2,6,34
most certainly was,’ agreed Qruze,
missing the irony entirely. ‘I
can’t imagine what they thought
they were doing here.’
‘Prosecuting a war?’ Loken
suggested. Qruze looked at him
diffidently. ‘Are you mocking me,
Garviel?’ ‘Never, sir. I would
never do that.’ ‘I hope we’re
deployed,’ Marr grumbled, ‘and
soon.’ ‘We won’t be,’ Qruze
declared. He rubbed the patchy grey
goatee that decorated his long, lined
face. He was most certainly not a Son
of Horus. ‘I’ve business to
attend to,’ Loken said, excusing
himself. ‘I’ll take my leave,
brothers.’ Marr glared at Loken,
2,6,35
annoyed to be left alone with the
Half-heard. Loken winked and wandered
off, hearing Qruze embark on one of
his long and tortuous ‘stories’
to Marr. Loken went downship to the
barrack decks of Tenth Company. His
men were waiting, half-armoured,
weapons and kit spread out for
fitting. Apprenta and servitors
manned portable lathes and forge
carts, making final, precise
adjustments to plate segments. This
was just displacement activity: the
men had been battle-ready for weeks.
Loken took the time to appraise Vipus
and the other squad leaders of the
situation, and then spoke briefly to
some of the new blood warriors
2,6,36
they’d raised to company service
during the voyage. These men were
especially tense. One Forty Twenty
might see their baptism as full
Astartes. In the solitude of his
arming chamber, Loken sat for a
while, running through certain mental
exercises designed to promote clarity
and concentration. When he grew bored
of them, he took up the book
Sindermann had loaned him. He’d
read a good deal less of
TheChronicles of Ursh during the
voyage  than he’d intended. The
commander had kept him busy. He
folded the heavy, yellowed pages open
with ungloved hands and found his
place. The Chronicles were as raw and
2,6,37
brutal as Sindermann had promised.
Longforgotten cities were routinely
sacked, or burned, or simply
evaporated in nuclear storms. Seas
were regularly stained with blood,
skies with ash, and landscapes were
often carpeted with the bleached and
numberless bones of the conquered.
When armies marched, they marched a
billion strong, the ragged banners of
a million standards swaying above
their heads in the atomic winds. The
battles were stupendous maelstroms of
blades and spiked black helms and
baying horns, lit by the fires of
cannons and burners. Page after page
celebrated the cruel practices and
equally cruel character of the despot
2,6,38
Kalagann. It amused Loken, for the
most part. Fanciful logic abounded,
as did an air of strained realism.
Feats of arms were described that no
pre-Unity warriors could have
accomplished. These, after all, were
the feral hosts of technobarbarians
that the proto-Astartes, in their
crude thunder armour, had been
created to bring to heel.
Kalagann’s great generals, Lurtois
and Sheng Khal and, later, Quallodon,
were described in language more
appropriate to primarchs. They
carved, for Kalagann, an impossibly
vast domain during the latter part of
the Age of Strife. Loken had skipped
ahead once or twice, and saw that
2,6,39
later parts of the work recounted the
fall of Kalagann, and described the
apocalyptic conquest of Ursh by the
forces of Unity. He saw passages
referring to enemy warriors bearing
the thunderbolt and lightning emblem,
which had been the personal device of
the Emperor before the eagle of the
Imperium was formalised. These men
saluted with the fist of unity, as
Qruze still did, and were clearly
arrayed in thunder armour. Loken
wondered if the Emperor himself would
be mentioned, and in what terms, and
wanted to look to see if he could
recognise the names of any of the
proto-Astartes warriors. But he felt
he owed it to Kyril Sindermann to
2,6,40
read the thing thoroughly, and
returned to his original place and
order. He quickly became absorbed by
a sequence detailing Shang Khal’s
campaigns against the Nordafrik
Conclaves. Shang Khal had assembled a
significant horde of irregular levies
from the southern client states of
Ursh, and used them to support his
main armed strengths, including the
infamous Tupelov Lancers and the Red
Engines, during the invasion.  The
Nordafrik technogogues had preserved
a great deal more high technology for
the good of their conclaves than Ursh
possessed, and sheer envy, more than
anything, motivated the war. Kalagann
was hungry for the fine instruments
2,6,41
and mechanisms the conclaves owned.
Eight epic battles marked Shang
Khal’s advance into the Nord-afrik
zones, the greatest of them being
Xozer. Over a period of nine days and
nights, the war machines of the Red
Engines blasted their way across the
cultivated agroponic pastures and
reduced them back to the desert, from
which they had originally been
irrigated and nurtured. They cut
through the laserthorn hedges and the
jewelled walls of the outer conclave,
and unleashed dirty atomics into the
heart of the ruling zone, before the
Lancers led a tidal wave of screaming
berserkers through the breach into
the earthly paradise of the gardens
2,6,42
at Xozer, the last fragment of Eden
on a corrupted planet. Which they, of
course, trampled underfoot. Loken
felt himself skipping ahead again, as
the account bogged down in
interminable lists of battle glories
and honour rolls. Then his eyes
alighted on a strange phrase, and he
read back. At the heart of the ruling
zone, a ninth, minor battle had
marked the conquest, almost as an
afterthought. One bastion had
remained, the murengon , or walled
sanctuary, where the last hierophants
of the conclaves held out,
practising, so the text said, their
‘sciomancy by the flame lyght of
their burning realm’. Shang Khal,
2,6,43
wishing swift resolution to the
conquest, had sent Anult Keyser to
crush the sanctuary. Keyser was lord
martial of the Tupelov Lancers and,
by various bonds of honour, could
call freely upon the services of the
Roma, a squadron of mercenary fliers
whose richly decorated interceptors,
legend said, never landed or touched
the earth, but lived eternally in the
scope of the air. During the advance
on the murengon, Keyser’s
oneirocriticks – and by that word,
Loken understood the text meant
‘interpreters of dreams’ – had
warned of the hierophants’
sciomancy, and their phantasmagorian
ways. When the battle began, just as
2,6,44
the oneirocriticks had warned, majiks
were unleashed. Plagues of insects,
as thick as monsoon rain and so vast
in their swirling masses that they
blacked out the sun, fell upon
Keyser’s forces, choking air
intakes, weapon ports, visors, ears,
mouths and throats. Water boiled
without fire. Engines overheated or
burned out. Men turned to stone, or
their bones turned to paste, or their
flesh succumbed to boils and buboes
and flaked off their limbs. Others
went mad. Some became daemons and
turned upon their own. Loken stopped
reading and went back over the
sentences again. ‘…and where the
plagueing ynsects did nott crawle, or
2,6,45
madness lye, so men did blister and
recompose them ownselves ynto the
terrible likeness of daimons, such
foule pests as the afreet and the
d’genny that persist in the silent
desert places. In such visage, they
turned uponn theyr kin and gnawed
then upon their bloody bones…’ .
their own Some became daemons and
turned upon Anult Keyser himself was
slain by one such daemon, which had,
just hours previously, been his loyal
lieutenant, Wilhym Mardol. When Shang
Khal heard the news, he flew into a
fury, and went at once to the scene,
bringing with him what the text
described as his ‘wrathsingers’,
who appeared to be magi of some sort.
2,6,46
Their leader, or master, was a man
called Mafeo Orde, and somehow, Orde
drew the wrathsingers into a kind of
remote warfare with the hierophants.
The text was annoyingly vague about
exactly what occurred next, almost as
if it was beyond the understanding of
the writer. Words such as
‘sorcery’ and ‘majik’ were
employed frequently, without
qualification, and there were
invocations to dark, primordial gods
that the writer clearly thought his
audience would have some prior
knowledge of. Since the start of the
text, Loken had seen references to
Kalagann’s ‘sorcerous’ powers,
and the ‘invisibles artes’ that
2,6,47
formed a key part of Ursh’s power,
but he had taken them to be
hyperbole. This was the first time
sorcery had appeared on the page, as
a kind of fact. The earth trembled,
as if afraid. The sky tore like silk.
Many in the Urshite force heard the
voices of the dead whispering to
them. Men caught fire, and walked
around, bathed in lambent flames that
did not consume them, pleading for
help. The remote war between the
wrathsingers and the hierophants
lasted for six days, and when it
ended, the ancient desert was thick
with snow, and the skies had turned
blood red. The air formations of the
Roma had been forced to flee, lest
2,6,48
their craft be torn from the heavens
by screaming angels and dashed down
upon the ground. At the end of it,
all the wrathsingers were dead,
except Orde himself. The murengon was
a smoking hole in the ground, its
stone walls so hideously melted by
heat they had become slips of glass.
And the hierophants were extinct.
The chapter ended. Loken looked up.
He had been so enthralled, he
wondered if he had missed an alert or
a summons. The arming chamber was
quiet. No signal runes blinked on the
wall panel. He began to read the next
part, but the narrative had switched
to a sequence concerning some
northern war against the nomadic
2,6,49
caterpillar cities of the Taiga. He
skipped a few pages, hunting for
further mention of Orde or sorcery,
but could detect none. Frustrated, he
set the book aside. Sindermann… had
he given Loken this work
deliberately? To what end? A joke?
Some veiled message? Loken resolved
to study it, section by section, and
take his questions to his mentor. But
he’d had enough of it for the time
being. His mind was clouded and he
wanted it clear for combat. He walked
to the vox-plate beside the chamber
door and activated it. ‘Officer of
the watch. How can I serve,
captain?’ ‘Any word from the
speartip?’ ‘I’ll check, sir.
2,6,50
No, nothing routed to you.’
‘Thank you. Keep me appraised.’
‘Sir.’ Loken clicked the vox off.
He walked back to where he had left
the book, picked it up, and marked
his page. He was using a thin sliver
of parchment torn from the edge of
one of his oath papers as a marker.
He closed the book, and went to put
it away in the battered metal crate
where he kept his belongings. There
were precious few items in there,
little to show for such a long life.
It reminded him of Jubal’s meagre
effects. If I die, Loken thought, who
will clean this out? What will they
preserve? Most of the bric-a-brac was
worthless trophies, stuff that only
2,6,51
meant something to him: the handle of
a combat knife he’d broken off in
the gullet of a greenskin warboss;
long feathers, now musty and
threadbare, from the hatchet-beak
that had almost killed him on
Balthasar, decades earlier; a piece
of dirty, rusted wire, knotted at
each end, which he’d used to
garrote a nameless eldar champion
when all other weapons had been lost
to him. That had been a fight. A real
test. He decided he ought to tell
Oliton about it, sometime. How long
ago was it? Ages past, though the
memory was as fresh and heavy as if
it had been yesterday. Two warriors,
deprived of their common arsenals by
2,6,52
the circumstance of war, stalking one
another through the fluttering leaves
of a wind-lashed forest. Such skill
and tenacity. Loken  had almost wept
in admiration for the opponent he had
slain. All that was left was the wire
and the memory, and when Loken
passed, only the wire would remain.
Whoever came here after his death
would likely throw it out, assuming
it to be a twist of rusty wire and
nothing more. His rummaging hands
turned up something that would not be
cast away. The data-slate Karkasy had
given him. The data-slate from
Keeler. Loken sat back and switched
it on, flicking through the picts
again. Rare picts. Tenth Company,
2,6,53
assembled on the embarkation deck for
war. The company banner. Loken
himself, framed against the bold
colour of the flag. Loken taking his
oath of moment. The Mournival group:
Abaddon, Aximand, Torgaddon and
himself, with Targost and Sedirae. He
loved the picts. They were the most
precious material gift he’d ever
received, and the most unexpected.
Loken hoped that, through Oliton, he
might leave some sort of useful
legacy. He doubted it would be
anything like as significant as these
images. He scrolled the picts back
into their file, and was about to de-
activate the slate when he saw, for
the first time, there was another
2,6,54
file lodged in the memory. It was
stored, perhaps deliberately, in an
annex to the slate’s main data
folder, hidden from cursory view.
Only a tiny icon digit ‘2’
betrayed that the slate was loaded
with more than one file of material.
It took him a moment to find the
annex and open it. It looked like a
folder of deleted or discarded
images, but there was a tag caption
attached to it that read ‘IN
CONFIDENCE’. Loken cued it. The
first pict washed into colour on the
slate’s small screen. He stared at
it, puzzled. It was dark, unbalanced
in colour or contrast, almost
unreadable. He thumbed up the next,
2,6,55
and the next. And stared in horrid
fascination. He was looking at Jubal,
or rather the thing that Jubal had
become in the final moments. A rabid,
insane mass, ploughing down a dark
hallway towards the viewer. There
were more shots. The light, the sheen
of them, seemed unnatural, as if the
picter unit that had captured them
had found difficulty reading the
image. There were clear, sharp-
focused droplets of gore and sweat
frozen in the air as they splashed
out in the foreground. The thing
behind them, the thing that had
shaken the droplets out, was fuzzy
and imprecise, but never less than
abominable.  Loken switched the slate
2,6,56
off and began to strip off his armour
as quickly as he could. When he was
down to the thick, mimetic polymers
of his sub-suit bodyglove, he
stopped, and pulled on a long, hooded
robe of brown hemp. He took up the
slate, and a vox-cuff, and went
outside. ‘Nero!’ Vipus appeared,
fully plated except for his helm. He
frowned in confusion at the sight of
Loken’s attire. ‘Garvi? Where’s
your armour? What’s going on?’
‘I’ve an errand to run,’ Loken
replied quickly, clasping on the vox-
cuff. ‘You have command here in my
absence.’ ‘I do?’ ‘I’ll
return shortly.’ Loken held up the
cuff, and allowed it to auto-sync
2,6,57
channels with Vipus’s vox system.
Small notice lights on the cuff and
the collar of Vipus’s armour
flashed rapidly and then glowed in
unison. ‘If the situation changes,
if we’re called forwards, vox me
immediately. I’ll not be derelict
of my duties. But there’s something
I must do.’ ‘Like what?’ ‘I
can’t say,’ Loken said. Nero
Vipus paused and nodded. ‘Just as
you say, brother. I’ll cover for
you and alert you of any changes.’
He stood watching as his captain,
hooded and hurrying, slipped away
down an access tunnel and was
swallowed by the shadows. The game
was going so badly against him that
2,6,58
Ignace Karkasy decided it was high
time he got his fellow players drunk.
Six of them, with a fairly
disinterested crowd of onlookers,
occupied a table booth at the forward
end of the Retreat, under the gilded
arches. Beyond them, remembrancers
and offduty soldiers, along with ship
personnel relaxing between shifts,
and a few iterators (one could never
tell if an iterator was on duty or
off) mingled in the long, crowded
chamber, drinking, eating, gaming and
talking. There was a busy chatter,
laughter, the clink of glasses.
Someone was playing a viol. The
Retreat had become quite the social
focus of the flagship. Just a week or
2,6,59
two before, a sozzled second engineer
had explained to Karkasy that there
had never been any gleeful society
aboard the Vengeful Spirit, nor on
any other line ship in his
experience. Just quiet after-shift
drinking and sullen gambling schools.
The remembrancers had brought their
bohemian habits to the warship, and
the crewmen and soldiery had been
drawn to its light. The iterators,
and some senior ship officers, had
clucked disapprovingly at the
growing, casual conviviality, but the
mingling was permitted. When Comnenus
had voiced his objections to the
unlicensed carousing the Vengeful
Spiritwas now host to, someone –
2,6,60
and Karkasy suspected the commander
himself – had reminded him that the
purpose of the remembrancers was to
meet and fraternise. Soldiers and
Navy adepts flocked to the Retreat,
hoping to find some poor poet or
chronicler who would record their
thoughts and experiences for
posterity. Though mostly, they came
to get a skinful, play cards and meet
girls. It was, in Karkasy’s
opinion, the finest achievement of
the remembrancer programme to date:
to remind the expedition warriors
they were human, and to offer them
some fun. And to win rudely from them
at cards. The game was targe main ,
and they were playing with a pack of
2,6,61
square-cut cards that Karkasy had
once lent to Mersadie Oliton. There
were two other remembrancers at the
table, along with a junior deck
officer, a sergeant-atarms and a
gunnery oberst. They were using, as
bidding tokens, scurfs of gilt that
someone had cheerfully scraped off
one of the stateroom’s golden
columns. Karkasy had to admit that
the remembrancers had abused their
facilities terribly. Not only had the
columns been half-stripped to the
ironwork, the murals had been written
on and painted over. Verses had been
inscribed in patches of sky between
the shoulders of ancient heroes, and
those ancient heroes found themselves
2,6,62
facing eternity wearing comical
beards and eye patches. In places,
walls and ceilings had been
whitewashed, or lined with gum-paper,
and entire tracts of new composition
inscribed upon them. ‘I’ll sit
this hand out,’ Karkasy announced,
and pushed back his chair, scooping
up the meagre handful of scraped gilt
flecks he still owned. ‘I’ll find
us all some drinks.’ The other
players murmured approval as the
sergeant-at-arms dealt the next hand.
The junior deck officer, his head
sunk low and his eyes hooded, thumped
the heels of his hands together in
mock applause, his elbows on the
table top, his hands fixed high above
2,6,63
his lolling head. Karkasy moved off
through the crowd to find Zinkman.
Zinkman, a  sculptor, had drink, an
apparently bottomless reserve of it,
though where he sourced it from was
anyone’s guess. Someone had
suggested Zinkman had a private
arrangement with a crewman in climate
control who distilled the stuff.
Zinkman owed Karkasy at least one
bottle, from an unfinished game of
merci mercitwo nights earlier. He
asked for Zinkman at two or three
tables, and also made inquiries with
various groups standing about the
place. The viol music had stopped for
the moment, and some around were
clapping as Carnegi, the composer,
2,6,64
clambered up onto a table. Carnegi
owned a half-decent baritone voice,
and most nights he could be prevailed
upon to sing popular opera or take
requests. Karkasy had one. A squall
of laughter burst from nearby, where
a small, lively group had gathered on
stools and recliners to hear a
remembrancer give a reading from his
latest work. In one of the wall
booths formed by the once golden
colonnade, Karkasy saw Ameri Sechloss
carefully inscribing her latest
remembrance in red ink over a wall
she’d washed white with stolen hull
paint. She’d masked out an image of
the Emperor triumphant at Cyclonis.
Someone would complain about that.
2,6,65
Parts of the Emperor, beloved by all,
poked out from around the corners of
her white splash. ‘Zinkman? Anyone?
Zinkman?’ he asked. ‘I think
he’s over there,’ one of the
remembrancers watching Sechloss
suggested. Karkasy turned, and stood
on tiptoe to peer across the press.
The Retreat was crowded tonight. A
figure had just walked in through the
chamber’s main entrance. Karkasy
frowned. He didn’t need to be on
tiptoe to spot this newcomer. Robed
and hooded, the figure towered over
the rest of the crowd, by far and
away the tallest person in the busy
room. Not a human’s build at all.
The general noise level did not drop,
2,6,66
but it was clear the newcomer was
attracting attention. People were
whispering, and casting sly looks in
his direction. Karkasy edged his way
through the crowd, the only person in
the chamber bold enough to approach
the visitor. The hooded figure was
standing just inside the entrance
arch, scanning the crowd in search of
someone. ‘Captain?’ Karkasy
asked, coming forwards and peering up
under the cowl. ‘Captain Loken?’
‘Karkasy.’ Loken seemed very
uncomfortable. ‘Were you looking
for me, sir? I didn’t think we were
due to meet until tomorrow.’ ‘I
was… I was looking for Keeler. Is
she here?’ ‘Here? Oh no. She
2,6,67
doesn’t come here. Please, captain,
come with me. You don’t want to be
in here.’ ‘Don’t I?’ ‘I can
read the discomfort in your manner,
and when we meet, you never step
inside the archway. Come on.’ They
went back out through the arched
entranceway into the cool, gloomy
quiet of the corridor outside. A few
people passed them by, heading into
the Retreat. ‘It must be
important,’ Karkasy said, ‘for
you to set foot in there.’ ‘It
is,’ Loken replied. He kept the
hood of his robe up, and his manner
remained stiff and guarded. ‘I need
to find Keeler.’ ‘She doesn’t
much frequent the common spaces.
2,6,68
She’s probably in her quarters.’
‘Where’s that?’ ‘You could
have asked the watch officer for her
billet reference.’ ‘I’m asking
you, Ignace.’ ‘That important,
and that private,’ Karkasy
remarked. Loken made no reply.
Karkasy shrugged. ‘Come with me and
I’ll show you.’ Karkasy led the
captain down into the warren of the
residential deck where the
remembrancers were billeted. The
echoing metal companionways were
cold, the walls brushed steel and
marked with patches of damp. This
area had once been a billet for army
officers but, like the Retreat, it
had ceased to feel anything like the
2,6,69
interior of a military vessel. Music
echoed from some chambers, often
through half-open hatches. The sound
of hysterical laughter came from one
room, and from another the din of a
man and a woman having a ferocious
quarrel. Paper notices had been
pasted to the walls: slogans and
verses and essays on the nature of
man and war. Murals had also been
daubed in places, some of them
magnificent, some of them crude.
There was litter on the deck, an odd
shoe, an empty bottle, scraps of
paper. ‘Here,’ said Karkasy. The
shutter of Keeler’s billet was
closed. ‘Would you like me
to…?’ Karkasy asked, gesturing to
2,6,70
the door. ‘Yes.’  Karkasy rapped
his fist against the shutter and
listened. After a moment, he rapped
again, harder. ‘Euphrati? Euphrati,
are you there?’ The shutter slid
open, and the scent of body warmth
spilled out into the cool corridor.
Karkasy was face to face with a lean
young man, naked but for a pair of
half-buttoned army fatigue pants. The
man was sinewy and tough, hard-bodied
and hard-faced. He had numerical
tattoos on his upper arms, and metal
tags on a chain around his neck.
‘What?’ he snapped at Karkasy.
‘I want to see Euphrati.’ ‘Piss
off,’ the soldier replied. ‘She
doesn’t want to see you.’ Karkasy
2,6,71
backed away a step. The soldier was
physically intimidating. ‘Cool
down,’ said Loken, looming behind
Karkasy and lowering his hood. He
stared down at the soldier. ‘Cool
down, and I won’t ask your name and
unit.’ The soldier looked up at
Loken with wide eyes. ‘She…
she’s not here,’ he said. Loken
pushed past him. The soldier tried to
block him, but Loken caught his right
wrist in one hand and turned it
neatly so that the man suddenly found
himself contorted in a disabling
lock. ‘Don’t do that again,’
Loken advised, and released his hold,
adding a tiny shove that dropped the
soldier onto his hands and knees. The
2,6,72
room was quite small, and very
cluttered. Discarded clothes and
rumpled bedding littered the floor
space, and the shelves and low table
were covered with bottles and
unwashed plates. Keeler stood on the
far side of the room, beside the
unmade cot. She had pulled a sheet
around her slim, naked body and
stared at Loken with disdain. She
looked weary, unhealthy. Her hair was
tangled and there were dark shadows
under her eyes. ‘It’s all right,
Leef,’ she told the soldier.
‘I’ll see you later.’ Still
wary, the soldier pulled on his vest
and boots, snatched up his jacket,
and left, casting one last murderous
2,6,73
look at Loken. ‘He’s a good
man,’ Keeler said. ‘He cares for
me.’ ‘Army?’ ‘Yes. It’s
called fraternisation. Does Ignace
have to be here for this?’ Karkasy
was hovering in the doorway. Loken
turned. ‘Thank you for your
help,’ he said. ‘I’ll see you
tomorrow.’  Karkasy nodded. ‘All
right,’ he said. Reluctantly, he
walked away. Loken closed the
shutter. He looked back at Keeler.
She was pouring clear liquor from a
flask into a shot glass. ‘Can I
interest you?’ she asked, gesturing
with the flask. ‘In the spirit of
hospitality?’ He shook his head.
‘Ah. I suppose you Astartes don’t
2,6,74
drink. Another biological flaw ironed
out of you.’ ‘We drink well
enough, under certain
circumstances.’ ‘And this isn’t
one, I suppose?’ Keeler put the
flask down and took up her glass. She
walked back to the cot, holding the
sheet around her with one hand and
sipping from the glass held in the
other. Holding her drink out steady,
she settled herself down on the cot,
drawing her legs up and folding the
sheet modestly over herself. ‘I can
imagine why you’re here,
captain,’ she said. ‘I’m just
amazed. I expected you weeks ago.’
‘I apologise. I only found the
second file tonight. I obviously
2,6,75
hadn’t looked carefully enough.’
‘What do you think of my work?’
‘Astonishing. I’m flattered by
the picts you shot on the embarkation
deck. I meant to send you a note,
thanking you for copying them to me.
Again, I apologise. The second file,
however, is…’ ‘Problematic?’
she suggested. ‘At the very
least,’ he said. ‘Why don’t you
sit down?’ she asked. Loken
shrugged off his robe and sat
carefully on a metal stool beside the
cluttered table. ‘I wasn’t aware
any picts existed of that
incident,’ Loken said. ‘I
didn’t know I’d shot them,’
Keeler replied, taking another sip.
2,6,76
‘I’d forgotten, I think. When the
first captain asked me at the time, I
said no, I hadn’t taken anything. I
found them later. I was surprised.’
‘Why did you send them to me?’ he
asked. She shrugged. ‘I don’t
really know. You have to understand,
sir, that I was… traumatised. For a
while, I was in a very bad way. The
shock of it all. I was a mess, but I
got through it. I’m content now,
stable, centred. My friends helped me
through it. Ignace, Sadie, some
others. They were kind to me. They
stopped me from hurting myself.’
‘Hurting yourself?’ She fiddled
with her glass, her eyes focused on
the floor. ‘Nightmares, Captain
2,6,77
Loken. Terrible visions, when I was
asleep and when I was awake. I found
myself crying for no reason. I drank
too much. I acquired a small pistol,
and spent long hours wondering if I
had the strength to use it.’ She
looked up at him. ‘It was in
that… that pit of despair that I
sent you those picts. It was a cry
for help, I suppose. I don’t know.
I can’t remember. Like I said,
I’m past that now. I’m fine, and
feel a little foolish for bothering
you, especially as my efforts took so
long to reach you. You wasted a
visit.’ ‘I’m glad you feel
better,’ Loken said, ‘but I
haven’t wasted anything. We need to
2,6,78
talk about those images. Who’s seen
them?’ ‘No one. You and me. No
one else.’ ‘Did you not think it
wise to inform the first captain of
their existence?’ Keeler shook her
head. ‘No. No, not at all. Not back
then. If I’d gone to the
authorities, they’d have
confiscated them… destroyed them,
probably, and told me the same story
about a wild beast. The first captain
was very certain it was a wild beast,
some xenos creature, and he was very
certain I should keep my mouth shut.
For the sake of morale. The picts
were a lifeline for me, back then.
They proved I wasn’t going mad.
That’s why I sent them to you.’
2,6,79
‘Am I not part of the
authorities?’ She laughed. ‘You
were there, Loken. You were there.
You saw it. I took a chance. I
thought you might respond and–’
‘And what?’ ‘Tell me the truth
of it.’ Loken hesitated. ‘Oh,
don’t worry,’ she admonished,
rising to refill her glass. ‘I
don’t want to know the truth now. A
wild beast. A wild beast. I’ve got
over it. This late in the day,
captain, I don’t expect you to
break loyalty and tell me something
you’re sworn not to tell. It was a
foolish notion, which I now regret.
My turn to apologise to you.’ She
looked over at him, tugging up the
2,6,80
edge of the sheet to cover her bosom.
‘I’ve deleted my copies. All of
them. You have my word. The only ones
that exist are the ones I sent to
you.’ Loken took out the data-slate
and placed it on the table. He had to
push dirty crockery aside to make a
space for it. Keeler looked at the
slate for a long while, and then
knocked back her glass and refilled
it.  ‘Imagine that,’ she said,
her hand trembling as it lifted the
flask. ‘I’m terrified even to
have them back in the room.’ ‘I
don’t think you’re as over it as
you like to pretend,’ Loken said.
‘Really?’ she sneered. She put
down her glass and ran the fingers of
2,6,81
her free hand through her short
blonde hair. ‘Hell with it, then,
since you’re here. Hell with it.’
She walked over and snatched up the
slate. ‘Wild beast, eh? Wild
beast?’ ‘Some form of vicious
predator indigenous to the mountain
region that–’ ‘Forgive me,
that’s so much shit,’ she said.
She snapped the slate into the reader
slot of a compact edit engine on the
far side of the room. Some of her
picters and spare lenses littered the
bench beside it. The engine whirred
into life, and the screen lit up,
cold and white. ‘What did you make
of the discrepancies?’
‘Discrepancies?’ Loken asked.
2,6,82
‘Yes.’ She expertly tapped
commands into the engine’s
controls, and selected the file. With
a stab of her index finger, she
opened the first image. It bloomed on
the screen. ‘Terra, I can’t look
at it,’ she said, turning away.
‘Switch it off, Keeler.’ ‘No,
you look at it. Look at the visual
distortion there. Surely you noticed
that? It’s like it’s there and
yet not there. Like it’s phasing in
and out of reality.’ ‘A signal
error. The conditions and the poor
light foxed your picter’s sensors
and–’ ‘I know how to use a
picter, captain, and I know how to
recognise poor exposure, lens flare,
2,6,83
and digital malformance. That’s not
it. Look.’ She punched up the
second pict, and half-looked at it,
gesturing with her hand. ‘Look at
the background. And the droplets of
blood in the foreground there.
Perfect pict capture. But the thing
itself. I’ve never seen anything
create that effect on a high-gain
instrument. That “wild beast” is
out of sync with the physical
continuity around it. Which is,
captain, exactly as I saw it.
You’ve studied these closely, no
doubt?’ ‘No,’ said Loken.
Keeler pulled up another image. She
stared at it fully this time, and
then looked away. ‘There, you see?
2,6,84
The afterimage? It’s on all of
them, but this is the clearest.’
‘I don’t see…’ ‘I’ll
boost the contrast and lose a little
of the motion blurring.’ She
fiddled with the engine’s controls.
‘There. See now?’ Loken stared.
What had at first seemed to be a
frothy, milky ghost blurring across
the image of the nightmare thing had
resolved clearly thanks to her
manipulation. Superimposed on the
fuzzy abomination was a semi-human
shape, echoing the pose and posture
of the creature. Though it was faint,
there was no mistaking the shrieking
face and wracked body of Xavyer
Jubal. ‘Know him?’ she asked.
2,6,85
‘I don’t, but I recognise the
physiognomy and build of an Astartes
when I see it. Why would my picter
register that, unless…’ Loken
didn’t reply. Keeler switched the
screen off, popped out the slate and
tossed it back to Loken. He caught it
neatly. She went back over to the cot
and flopped down. ‘That’s what I
wanted you to explain to me,’ she
said. ‘That’s why I sent you the
picts. When I was in my deepest,
darkest pits of madness, that’s
what I was hoping you’d come and
explain to me, but don’t worry.
I’m past that now. I’m fine. A
wild beast, that’s all it was. A
wild beast.’ Loken gazed at the
2,6,86
slate in his hand. He could barely
imagine what Keeler had been through.
It had been bad enough for the rest
of them, but he and Nero and
Sindermann had all enjoyed the
benefit of proper closure. They’d
been told the truth. Keeler hadn’t.
She was smart and bright and clever,
and she’d seen the holes in the
story, the awful inconsistencies that
proved there had been more to the
event than the first captain’s
explanation. And she’d managed with
that knowledge, coped with it, alone.
‘What did you think it was?’ he
asked. ‘Something awful that we
should never know about,’ she
replied. ‘Throne, Loken. Please
2,6,87
don’t take pity on me now. Please
don’t decide to tell me.’ ‘I
won’t,’ he said. ‘I can’t. It
was a wild beast. Euphrati, how did
you deal with it?’ ‘What do you
mean?’ ‘You say you’re fine
now. How are you fine?’ ‘My
friends helped me through. I told
you.’ Loken got up, picked up the
flask, and went over to the cot. He
sat down on the end of the mattress
and refilled the glass she held out.
‘Thank you,’ she said. ‘I’ve
found strength. I’ve found–’
For a moment, Loken was certain she
had been about to say ‘faith’.
‘What?’ ‘Trust. Trust in the
Imperium. In the Emperor. In you.’
2,6,88
‘In me?’ ‘Not you, personally.
In the Astartes, in the Imperial
army, in every branch of mankind’s
warrior force that is dedicated to
the protection of us mere mortals.’
She took a sip and sniggered. ‘The
Emperor, you see, protects.’ ‘Of
course he does,’ said Loken. ‘No,
no, you misunderstand,’ said
Keeler, folding her arms around her
raised, sheet-covered knees. ‘He
actually does. He protects mankind,
through the Legions, through the
martial corps, through the war
machines of the Mechanicum. He
understands the dangers. The
inconsistencies. He uses you, and all
the instruments like you, to protect
2,6,89
us from harm. To protect our physical
bodies from murder and damage, to
protect our minds from madness, to
protect our souls. This is what I now
understand. This is what this trauma
has taught me, and I am thankful for
it. There are insane dangers in the
cosmos, dangers that mankind is
fundamentally unable to comprehend,
let alone survive. So he protects us.
There are truths out there that would
drive us mad by one fleeting glimpse
of them. So he chooses not to share
them with us. That’s why he made
you.’ ‘That’s a glorious
concept,’ Loken admitted. ‘In the
Whisperheads, that day… You saved
me, didn’t you? You shot that thing
2,6,90
apart. Now you save me again, by
keeping the truth to yourself. Does
it hurt?’ ‘Does what hurt?’
‘The truth you keep hidden?’
‘Sometimes,’ he said.
‘Remember, Garviel. The Emperor is
our truth and our light. If we trust
in him, he will protect.’ ‘Where
did you get that from?’ Loken
asked. ‘A friend. Garviel, I have
only one concern. A lingering thing
that will not quit my mind. You
Astartes are loyal, through and
through. You keep to your own, and
never break confidence.’ ‘And?’
‘Tonight, I really believe you
would have told me something, but for
the loyalty you keep with your
2,6,91
brothers. I admire that, but answer
me this. How  far does your loyalty
go? Whatever it was happened to us in
the Whisperheads, I believe an
Astartes brother was part of it. But
you close ranks. What has to happen
before you forsake your loyalty to
the Legion and recognise your loyalty
to the rest of us?’ ‘I don’t
know what you mean,’ he said.
‘Yes, you do. If a brother turns on
his brothers again, will you cover
that up too? How many have to turn
before you act? One? A squad? A
company? How long will you keep your
secrets? What will it take for you to
cast aside the fraternal bonds of the
Legion and cry out “This is
2,6,92
wrong!”?’ ‘You’re suggesting
an impossible–’ ‘No, I’m not.
You, of all people, know I’m not.
If it can happen to one, it can
happen to others. You’re all so
drilled and perfect and identical.
You march to the same beat and do
whatever is asked of you. Loken, do
you know of any Astartes who would
break step? Would you?’ ‘I…’
‘Would you? If you saw the rot, a
hint of corruption, would you step
out of your regimented life and stand
against it? For the greater good of
mankind, I mean?’ ‘It’s not
going to happen,’ Loken said.
‘That would never happen. You’re
suggesting civil disunity. Civil war.
2,6,93
That is against every fibre of the
Imperium as the Emperor has created
it. With Horus as Warmaster, as our
guiding light, such a possibility is
beyond countenance. The Imperium is
firm and strong, and of one purpose.
There are inconsistencies, Euphrati,
just like there are wars and plagues
and famines. They hurt us, but they
do not kill us. We rise above them
and move onwards.’ ‘It rather
depends,’ she remarked, ‘where
those inconsistencies occur.’
Loken’s vox-cuff suddenly began to
bleat. Loken raised his wrist, and
thumbed the call stud. ‘I’m on my
way,’ he said. He looked back at
her. ‘Let’s talk again,
2,6,94
Euphrati,’ he said. She nodded. He
leant forwards and kissed her on the
forehead. ‘Be well. Be better. Look
to your friends.’ ‘Are you my
friend?’ she asked. ‘Know it,’
he said. He got up and retrieved his
robe from the floor. ‘Garviel,’
she called from the cot. ‘Yes?’
‘Delete those images, please. For
me. They don’t need to exist.’
He nodded, opened the shutter, and
stepped out into the chill of the
hall. Once the shutter had closed,
Keeler got up off the cot and let the
sheet fall from her. Naked, she
padded over to a cupboard, knelt and
opened its doors. From inside, she
took out two candles and a small
2,6,95
figurine of the Emperor. She placed
them on the top of the cupboard, and
lit the candles with an igniter. Then
she rummaged in the cupboard and
pulled out the dog-eared pamphlet
that Leef had given her. It was a
cheap, crude thing, badly pressed
from a mechanical bulk-printer. There
were ink soils along its edges, and
rather a lot of spelling mistakes in
the text. Keeler didn’t care. She
opened the first page and, bowed
before the makeshift shrine, she
began to read. ‘The Emperor of
Mankind is the Light and the Way, and
all his actions are for the benefit
of mankind, which is his people. The
Emperor is God and God is the
2,6,96
Emperor, so it is taught in the
Lectitio Divinitatus, and above all
things, the Emperor will
protect…’ Loken ran down the
companionways of the remembrancers’
billet wing, his cloak billowing out
behind him. Sirens were sounding. Men
and women peered out of doorways to
look at him as he passed by. He
raised his cuff to his mouth.
‘Nero. Report! Is it Tarik? Has
something happened?’ The vox
crackled and Vipus’s voice issued
tinnily from the cuff speaker.
‘Something’s happened all right,
Garvi. Get back here.’ ‘What?
What’s happened?’ ‘A ship,
that’s what. A battle-barge has
2,6,97
just translated in-system behind us.
It’s Sanguinius. Sanguinius himself
has come.’  
2,6,98
SEVEN
 Lord of the
Angels Brotherhood in Spiderland
Interdiction Just a week or so
earlier, during one of their regular,
private interviews, Loken had finally
told Mersadie Oliton about the Great
Triumph after Ullanor. ‘You cannot
imagine it,’ he said. ‘I can
try.’ Loken smiled. ‘The
Mechanicum had planed smooth an
entire continent as a stage for the
event.’ ‘Planed smooth? What?’
‘With industrial meltas and
geoformer engines. Mountains were
erased and their matter used to
infill valleys. The surface was left
smooth and endless, a vast table of
2,7,1
dry, polished rock chippings. It took
months to accomplish.’ ‘It ought
to have taken centuries!’ ‘You
underestimate the industry of the
Mechanicum. They sent four labour
fleets to undertake the work. They
made a stage worthy of an Emperor, so
broad it could know midnight at one
end and midday at the other.’
‘You exaggerate!’ she cried, with
a delighted snort. ‘Maybe I do.
Have you known me do that before?’
Oliton shook her head. ‘You have to
understand, this was a singular
event. It was a Triumph to mark the
turn of an era, and the Emperor,
beloved of all, knew it. He knew it
had to be remembered. It was the end
2,7,2
of the Ullanor campaign, the end of
the crusade, the coronation of the
Warmaster. It was a chance for the
Astartes to  say farewell to the
Emperor before his departure to
Terra, after two centuries of
personal leadership. We wept as he
announced his retirement from the
field. Can you picture that,
Mersadie? A hundred thousand
warriors, weeping?’ She nodded.
‘I think it was a shame no
remembrancers were there to witness
it. It was a moment that comes only
once every epoch.’ ‘It was a
private affair.’ She laughed again.
‘A hundred thousand present, a
continent levelled for the event, and
2,7,3
it was a private affair?’ Loken
looked at her. ‘Even now, you
don’t understand us, do you? You
still think on a very human scale.’
‘I stand corrected,’ she replied.
‘I meant no offence,’ he said,
noticing her expression, ‘but it
was a private affair. A ceremony. A
hundred thousand Astartes. Eight
million army regulars. Legions of
Titan war machines, like forests of
steel. Armour units by the hundred,
formations of tanks, thousands upon
thousands. Warships filling the low
orbit, eclipsed by the squadrons of
aircraft flying over in unending
echelons. Banners and standards, so
many banners and standards.’ He
2,7,4
fell silent for a moment,
remembering. ‘The Mechanicum had
made a roadway. Half a kilometre
wide, and five hundred kilometres
long, a straight line across the
stage they had levelled. On each side
of this road, every five metres, was
an iron post topped with the skull of
a greenskin, trophies of the Ullanor
war. Beyond the roadway, to either
hand, promethium fires burned in
rockcrete basins. For five hundred
kilometres. The heat was intense. We
marched along the roadway in review,
passing below the dais on which the
Emperor stood, beneath a steel-scale
canopy. The dais was the only raised
structure the Mechanicum had left,
2,7,5
the root of an old mountain. We
marched in review, and then assembled
on the wide plain below the dais.’
‘Who marched?’ ‘All of us.
Fourteen Legions were represented,
either in total or by a company. The
others were engaged in wars too
remote to allow them to attend. The
Luna Wolves were there en mass, of
course. Nine primarchs were there,
Mersadie. Nine. Horus, Dorn, Angron,
Fulgrim, Lorgar, Mortarion,
Sanguinius, Magnus, the Khan. The
rest had sent ambassadors. Such a
spectacle. You cannot imagine.’
‘I’m still trying.’  Loken
shook his head. ‘I’m still trying
to believe I was there.’ ‘What
2,7,6
were they like?’ ‘You think I met
them? I was just another brother-
warrior marching in the file. In my
life, lady, I have seen almost all of
the primarchs at one time or another,
but mostly from a distance. I’ve
personally spoken to two of them.
Until my election to the Mournival, I
didn’t move in such elevated
circles. I know the primarchs as
distant figures. At the Triumph, I
could barely believe so many were
present.’ ‘But still, you had
impressions?’ ‘Indelible
impressions. Each one, so mighty, so
huge and so proud. They seemed to
embody human characteristics. Angron,
red and angry; Dorn solid and
2,7,7
implacable; Magnus, veiled in
mystery, and Sanguinius, of course.
So perfect. So charismatic.’
‘I’ve heard this of him.’
‘Then you’ve heard the truth.’
His long black hair was pressed down
by the weight of the shawl of gold
chain he wore across his head. The
edges of it framed his solemn
features. He had marked his cheeks
with grey ash in mourning. An
attendant stood by with ink pot and
brush to paint the ritual tears of
grief on his cheeks, but Primarch
Sanguinius shook his head, making the
chain shawl clink. ‘I have real
tears,’ he said. He turned, not to
his brother Horus, but to Torgaddon.
2,7,8
‘Show me, Tarik,’ he said.
Torgaddon nodded. The wind moaned
around the still figures assembled on
the lonely hillside, and rain
pattered off their armour plate.
Torgaddon gestured, and Tarvitz,
Bulle and Lucius stepped forwards,
holding out the dirty relics.
‘These men, my lord,’ Torgaddon
said, his voice unusually shaky,
‘these Children of the Emperor,
recovered these remains selflessly,
and it is fit they offer them to you
themselves.’ ‘You did this
honour?’ Sanguinius asked Tarvitz.
‘I did, my lord.’ Sanguinius took
the battered Astartes helm from
Tarvitz’s hands and studied it. He
2,7,9
towered over the captain, his golden
plate badged with rubies  and bright
jewels, and marked, like the armour
of the Warmaster, with the unblinking
eye of Terra. Sanguinius’s vast
wings, like the pinions of a giant
eagle, were furled against his back,
and hung with silver bands and loops
of pearls. Sanguinius turned the helm
over in his hands, and regarded the
armourer’s mark inside the rim.
‘Eight knight leopard,’ he said.
At his side, Chapter Master Raldoron
began to inspect the manifest.
‘Don’t trouble yourself, Ral,’
Sanguinius told him. ‘I know the
mark. Captain Thoros. He will be
missed.’ Sanguinius handed the helm
2,7,10
to Raldoron and nodded to Tarvitz.
‘Thank you for this kindness,
captain,’ he said. He looked across
at Eidolon. ‘And to you, sir, my
gratitude that you came to Frome’s
help so urgently.’ Eidolon bowed,
and seemed to ignore the dark glare
the War-master was casting in his
direction. Sanguinius turned to
Torgaddon. ‘And to you, Tarik, most
of all. For breaking this nightmare
open.’ ‘I do only what my
Warmaster instructs me,’ Torgaddon
replied. Sanguinius looked over at
Horus. ‘Is that right?’ ‘Tarik
had some latitude,’ Horus smiled.
He stepped forwards and embraced
Sanguinius to his breast. No two
2,7,11
primarchs were as close as the
Warmaster and the Angel. They had
barely been out of each other’s
company since Sanguinius’s arrival.
The majestic Lord of the Blood
Angels, the IX Legion Astartes,
stepped back, and looked out across
the forlorn landscape. Around the
base of the ragged hill, hundreds of
armoured figures waited in silence.
The vast majority wore either the
hard white of the Luna Wolves or the
arterial red of the Angels, save for
the remnants of the detachment of
Emperor’s Children, a small knot of
purple and gold. Behind the Astartes,
the war machines waited in the rain,
silent and black, ringing the
2,7,12
gathering like spectral mourners.
Beyond them, the hosts of the
Imperial army stood in observance,
banners flapping sluggishly in the
cold breeze. Their armoured vehicles
and troop carriers were drawn up in
echelon, and many of the soldiers had
clambered up to stand on the hulls to
get a better view of the proceedings.
Torgaddon’s speartip had razed a
large sector of the landscape,
demolishing stone trees wherever they
could be found, and thus taming the
formidable weather in this part of
Murder. The sky had faded to a
mottled powder-grey, run through with
thin white bars of cloud, and rain
fell softly and persistently,
2,7,13
reducing visibility in the distances
to a foggy blur. At the Warmaster’s
command, the main force of the
assembled Imperial ships had made
planetfall in the comparative safety
of the storm-free zone. ‘In the old
philosophies of Terra,’ Sanguinius
said, ‘so I have read, vengeance
was seen as a weak motive and a flaw
of the spirit. It is hard for me to
feel so noble today. I would cleanse
this rock in the memory of my lost
brothers, and their kin who died
trying to save them.’ The Angel
looked at his primarch brother.
‘But that is not necessary.
Vengeance is not necessary. There is
xenos here, implacable alien menace
2,7,14
that rejects any civilised
intercourse with mankind, and has
greeted us with murder and murder
alone. That suffices. As the Emperor,
beloved by all, has taught us, since
the start of our crusade, what is
anathema to mankind must be dealt
with directly to ensure the continued
survival of the Imperium. Will you
stand with me?’ ‘We will murder
Murder together,’ Horus replied.
Once those words were spoken, the
Astartes went to war for six months.
Supported by the army and the devices
of the Mechanicum, they assaulted the
bleak, shivering latitudes of the
world called Murder, and laid waste
the megarachnid. It was a glorious
2,7,15
war, in many ways, and not an easy
one. No matter how many of them were
slaughtered, the megarachnid did not
cower or turn in retreat. It seemed
as if they had no will, nor any
spirit, to be broken. They came on
and on, issuing forth from cracks and
crevasses in the ruddy land, day
after day, set for further dispute.
At times, it felt as if there was an
endless reserve of them, as if
unimaginably vast nests of them
infested the mantle of the planet, or
as if ceaseless subterranean
factories manufactured more and yet
more of them every day to replace the
losses delivered by the Imperial
forces. For their own part, no matter
2,7,16
how many of them they slaughtered,
the warriors of the Imperium did not
come to underestimate the
megarachnid. They were lethal and
tough, and so numerous as to put a
man out of countenance. ‘The
fiftieth beast I killed,’ Little
Horus remarked at one stage, ‘was
as hard to overcome as the first.’
Loken, like many of the Luna Wolves
present, personally rejoiced in the
circumstances of the conflict, for it
was the first time since his election
as Warmaster that the commander had
led them on the field. Early on, in
the command habitent one rainy
evening, the Mournival had gently
tried to dissuade Horus from field
2,7,17
operations. Abaddon had attempted,
deftly, to portray the Warmaster’s
role and importance as a thing of a
much higher consequence than martial
engagement. ‘Am I not fit for
it?’ Horus had scowled, the rain
drumming on the canopy overhead. ‘I
mean you are too precious for it,
lord,’ Abaddon had countered.
‘This is one world, one field of
war. The Emperor has charged you with
the concerns of all worlds and all
fields. Your scope is–’
‘Ezekyle…’ The Warmaster’s
tone had betrayed a warning note, and
he had switched to Cthonic, a clear
sign his mind was on war and nothing
else, ‘…do not presume to
2,7,18
instruct me on my duties.’ ‘Lord,
I would not!’ Abaddon exclaimed
immediately, with a respectful bow.
‘Precious is the word,’ Aximand
had put in quickly, coming to
Abaddon’s aid. ‘If you were to be
wounded, to fall even, it would–’
Horus rose, glaring. ‘Now you
deride my abilities as a warrior,
little one? Have you grown soft since
my ascendance?’ ‘No, my lord,
no…’ Only Torgaddon, it seemed,
had noticed the glimmer of amusement
behind the Warmaster’s pantomime of
anger. ‘We’re only afraid you
won’t leave any glory for us,’ he
said. Horus began to laugh. Realising
he had been playing with them, the
2,7,19
members of the Mournival began to
laugh too. Horus cuffed Abaddon
across the shoulder and pinched
Aximand’s cheek. ‘We’ll war
this together, my sons,’ he said.
‘That is how I was made. If I had
suspected, back at Ullanor, that the
rank of Warmaster would require me to
relinquish the glories of the field
forever, I would not have accepted
it. Someone else could have taken the
honour. Guilleman or the Lion,
perhaps. They ache for it, after
all.’ More loud amusement followed.
The laughter of Cthonians is dark and
hard, but the laughter of Luna Wolves
is a harder thing altogether.
Afterwards, Loken wondered if the
2,7,20
Warmaster had not been using his sly
political skills yet again. He had
avoided the central issue entirely,
and deflected their concerns with
good humour and an appeal to their
code as warriors. It was his way of
telling them that, for all their good
counsel, there were some matters on
which his mind would not be swayed.
Loken was sure that Sanguinius was
the reason. Horus could not bring
himself to stand by and watch his
dearest brother go to war. Horus
could not resist the temptation of
fighting shoulder to shoulder with
Sanguinius, as they had done in the
old days. Horus would not let himself
be outshone, even by the one he loved
2,7,21
most dearly. To see them together on
the battlefield was a heart-stopping
thing. Two gods of war, raging at the
head of a tide of red and white.
Dozens of times, they accomplished
victories in partnership on Murder
that should, had what followed been
any different, become deeds as lauded
and immortal as Ullanor or any other
great triumph. Indeed the war as a
whole produced many extraordinary
feats that posterity ought to have
celebrated, especially now the
remembrancers were amongst them. Like
all her kind, Mersadie Oliton was not
permitted to descend to the surface
with the fighting echelons, but she
absorbed every detail transmitted
2,7,22
back from the surface, the daily ebb
and flow of the brutal warfare, the
losses and the gains. When,
periodically, Loken returned with his
company to the flagship to rest,
repair and re-arm, she quizzed him
furiously, and made him describe all
he had seen. Horus and Sanguinius,
side by side, was what interested her
the most, but she was captivated by
all his accounts. Many battles had
been vast, pitched affairs, where
thousands of Astartes led tens of
thousands of army troopers against
endless files of the megarachnid.
Loken struggled to find the language
to describe it, and sometimes felt
himself, foolishly, borrowing lurid
2,7,23
turns of phrase he had picked up from
The Chronicles of Ursh . He told her
of the great things he had witnessed,
the particular moments. How Luc
Sedirae had led his company against a
formation of megarachnid twenty-five
deep and one hundred across, and
splintered it in under half an hour.
How Sacrus Carminus, Captain of the
Blood Angels Third Company, had held
the line against a buzzing host of
winged clades through one long,
hideous afternoon. How Iacton Qruze,
despite his stubborn, tiresome ways,
had broken the back of a surprise
megarachnid assault, and proved there
was mettle in him still. How Tybalt
Marr, ‘the Either’, had taken the
2,7,24
low mountains in two days and
elevated himself at last into the
ranks of the exceptional. How the
megarachnid had revealed more, and
yet more nightmarish biological
variations, including massive clades
that strode forwards like armoured
war machines, and how the Titans of
the Mechanicum, led at the van by the
Dies Iraeof the Legio Mortis, smote
them apart and trampled their
blackened wing cases underfoot. How
Saul Tarvitz, fighting at
Torgaddon’s side rather than in the
cohort of his arrogant lord Eidolon,
renewed the Luna Wolves’ respect
for the Emperor’s Children through
several feats of arms. Tarvitz and
2,7,25
Torgaddon had achieved a brotherhood
during the war and eased the
discontent between the two Legions.
Loken had heard rumours that Eidolon
was initially displeased with
Tarvitz’s deportment, until he
recognised how simple brotherhood and
effort was redeeming his mistake.
Eidolon, though he would never admit
it, realised full well he was out of
favour with the Warmaster, but as
time passed, he found he was at least
tolerated within the bounds of the
commander’s war-tent, and consulted
along with the other officers.
Sanguinius had also smoothed the way.
He knew his brother Horus was keen to
rebuke Fulgrim for the high-handed
2,7,26
qualities his Astartes had lately
displayed. Horus and Fulgrim were
close, almost as close as Sanguinius
and the Warmaster. It dismayed the
Lord of Angels to see a potential
rift in the making. ‘You cannot
afford dissent,’ Sanguinius had
said. ‘As Warmaster, you must have
the undivided respect of the
primarchs, just as the Emperor had.
Moreover, you and Fulgrim are too
long bound as brothers for you to
fall to bickering.’ The
conversation had taken place during a
brief hiatus in the fighting, during
the sixth week, when Raldoron and
Sedirae were leading the main force
west into a series of valleys and
2,7,27
narrow defiles along the foothills of
a great bank of mountains. The two
primarchs had rested for a day in a
command camp some leagues behind the
advance. Loken remembered it well. He
and the others of the Mournival had
been present in the main wartent when
Sanguinius brought the matter up.
‘I don’t bicker,’ Horus said,
as his armourers removed his heavy,
mudflecked wargear and bathed his
limbs. ‘The Emperor’s Children
have always  been proud, but that
pride is becoming insolence. Brother
or not, Fulgrim must know his place.
I have trouble enough with Angron’s
bloody rages and Perturabo’s damn
petulence. I’ll not brook
2,7,28
disrespect from such a close ally.’
‘Was it Fulgrim’s error, or his
man Eidolon’s?’ Sanguinius asked.
‘Fulgrim made Eidolon lord
commander. He favours his merits, and
evidently trusts him, and approves of
his manner. If Eidolon embodies the
character of the III Legion, then I
have issue with it. Not just here. I
need to know I can rely upon the
Emperor’s Children.’ ‘And why
do you think you can’t?’ Horus
paused while an attendant washed his
face, then spat sidelong into a bowl
held ready by another. ‘Because
they’re too damn proud of
themselves.’ ‘Are not all
Astartes proud of their own
2,7,29
cohort?’ Sanguinius took a sip of
wine. He looked over at the
Mournival. ‘Are you not proud,
Ezekyle?’ ‘To the ends of
creation, my lord,’ Abaddon
replied. ‘If I may, sir,’ said
Torgaddon, ‘there is a difference.
There is a man’s natural pride and
loyalty to his own Legion. That may
be a boastful pride, and the source
of rivalry between Astartes. But the
Emperor’s Children seem
particularly haughty, as if above the
likes of us. Not all of them, I
hasten to add.’ Listening, Loken
knew Torgaddon was referring to
Tarvitz and the other friends he had
made amongst Tarvitz’s unit.
2,7,30
Sanguinius nodded. ‘It is their
mindset. It has always been so. They
seek perfection, to be the best they
can, to echo the perfection of the
Emperor himself. It is not
superiority. Fulgrim has explained
this to me himself.’ ‘And Fulgrim
may believe so,’ Horus said, ‘but
superiority is how it manifests
amongst some of his men. There was
once mutual respect, but now they
sneer and condescend. I fear it is my
new rank that they resent. I’ll not
have it.’ ‘They don’t resent
you,’ Sanguinius said. ‘Maybe,
but they resent the role my rank
invests upon my Legion. The Luna
Wolves have always been seen as rude
2,7,31
barbarians. The flint of Cthonia is
in their hearts, and the smudge of
its dirt upon their skins. The
Children regard the Luna Wolves as
peers only by dint of my Legion’s
record in war. The Wolves sport no
finery or elegant manners. We are
cheerfully raw where they are
regal.’ ‘Then maybe it is time to
consider doing what the Emperor
suggested,’  Sanguinius said. Horus
shook his head emphatically. ‘I
refused that on Ullanor, honour
though it was. I’ll not contemplate
it again.’ ‘Things change. You
are Warmaster now. All the Legions
Astartes must recognise the
preeminence of the XVI Legion.
2,7,32
Perhaps some need to be reminded.’
Horus snorted. ‘I don’t see Russ
trying to clean up his berserk horde
and rebrand them to court respect.’
‘Leman Russ is not Warmaster,’
said Sanguinius. ‘Your title
changed, brother, at the Emperor’s
command, so that all the rest of us
would be in no mistake as to the
power you wield and the trust the
Emperor placed in you. Perhaps the
same thing must happen to your
Legion.’ Later, as they trudged
west through the drizzle, following
the plodding Titans across red
mudflats and skeins of surface water,
Loken asked Abaddon what the Lord of
Angels had meant. ‘At Ullanor,’
2,7,33
the first captain answered, ‘the
beloved Emperor advised our commander
to rename the XVI Legion, so there
might be no mistake as to the power
of our authority.’ ‘What name did
he wish us to take?’ Loken asked.
‘The Sons of Horus,’ Abaddon
replied. The sixth month of the
campaign was drawing to a close when
the strangers arrived. Over the
period of a few days, the vessels of
the expedition, high in orbit, became
aware of curious signals and etheric
displacements that suggested the
activity of starships nearby, and
various attempts were made to locate
the source. Advised of the situation,
the Warmaster presumed that other
2,7,34
reinforcements were on the verge of
arrival, perhaps even additional
units from the Emperor’s Children.
Patrolling scout ships, sent out by
Master Comnenus, and cruisers on
picket control, could find no
concrete trace of any vessels, but
many reported spectral readings, like
the precursor field elevations that
announced an imminent translation.
The expedition fleet left high anchor
and took station on a battle-ready
grid, with the Vengeful Spirit and
the Proudheart in the vanguard, and
the Misericordand the Red Tear ,
Sanguinius’s flagship, on the
trailing flank.  When the strangers
finally appeared, they came in
2,7,35
rapidly and confidently, gunning in
from a translation point at the
system edges: three massive capital
ships, of a build pattern and drive
signature unknown to Imperial
records. As they came closer, they
began to broadcast what seemed to be
challenge signals. The nature of
these signals was remarkably similar
to the repeat of the outstation
beacons, untranslatable and,
according to the Warmaster, akin to
music. The ships were big. Visual
relay showed them to be bright, sleek
and silver-white, shaped like royal
sceptres, with heavy prows, long,
lean hulls and splayed drive
sections. The largest of them was
2,7,36
twice the keel length of the Vengeful
Spirit . General alert was sounded
throughout the fleet, shields raised
and weapons unshrouded. The Warmaster
made immediate preparations to quit
the surface and return to his
flagship. Engagements with the
megarachnid were hastily broken off,
and the ground forces recalled into a
single host. Horus ordered Comnenus
to make hail, and hold fire unless
fired upon. There seemed a high
probability that these vessels
belonged to the megarachnid, come
from other worlds in support of the
nests on Murder. The ships did not
respond directly to the hails, but
continued to broadcast their own,
2,7,37
curious signals. They prowled in
close, and halted within firing
distance of the expedition formation.
Then they spoke. Not with one voice,
but with a chorus of voices, uttering
the same words, overlaid with more of
the curious musical transmissions.
The message was received cleanly by
the Imperial vox, and also by the
astrotelepaths, conveyed with such
force and authority, Ing Mae Sing and
her adepts winced. They spoke in the
language of mankind. ‘Did you not
see the warnings we left?’ they
said. ‘What have you done here?’

2,0,38
ONE
 Make no mistakes Cousins far
removed Other ways As an unexpected
sequel to the war on Murder, they
became the guests of the interex, and
right from the start of their
sojourn, voices had begun to call for
war. Eidolon was one, and a
vociferous one at that, but Eidolon
was out of favour and easy to
dismiss. Maloghurst was another, and
so too were Sedirae and Targost, and
Goshen, and Raldoron of the Blood
Angels. Such men were not so easy to
ignore. Sanguinius kept his counsel,
waiting for the Warmaster’s
decision, understanding that Horus
needed his brother primarch’s
3,1,1
unequivocal support. The argument,
best summarised by Maloghurst, ran as
follows: the people of the interex
are of our blood and we descend from
common ancestry, so they are lost
kin. But they differ from us in
fundamental ways, and these are so
profound, so inescapable, that they
are cause for legitimate war. They
contradict absolutely the essential
tenets of Imperial culture as
expressed by the Emperor, and such
contradictions cannot be tolerated.
For the while, Horus tolerated them
well enough. Loken could understand
why. The warriors of the interex were
easy to admire, easy to like. They
were gracious and noble, and once the
3,1,2
misunderstanding had been explained,
utterly without hostility. It took a
strange incident for Loken to learn
the truth behind the Warmaster’s
thinking. It took place during the
voyage, the nine-week voyage from
Murder to the nearest outpost world
of the interex, the mingled ships of
the expedition and its hangers-on
trailing the sleek vessels of the
interex flotilla. The Mournival had
come to Horus’s private staterooms,
and a bitter row had erupted. Abaddon
had been swayed by the arguments for
war. Both Maloghurst and Sedirae had
been whispering in his ear. He was
convinced enough to face the
Warmaster and not back down. Voices
3,1,3
had been raised. Loken had watched in
growing amazement as Abaddon and the
Warmaster bellowed at each other.
Loken had seen Abaddon wrathful
before, in the heat of combat, but he
had never seen the commander so ill-
tempered. Horus’s fury startled him
a little, almost scared him. As ever,
Torgaddon was trying to diffuse the
confrontation with levity. Loken
could see that even Tarik was
dismayed by the anger on show. ‘You
have no choice!’ Abaddon snarled.
‘We have seen enough already to
know that their ways are in
opposition to ours! You must–’
‘Must?’ Horus roared. ‘Must I?
You are Mournival, Abaddon! You
3,1,4
advise and you counsel, and that is
your place! Do not imagine you can
tell me what to do!’ ‘I don’t
have to! There is no choice, and you
know what must be done!’ ‘Get
out!’ ‘You know it in your
heart!’ ‘Get out!’ Horus
yelled, and cast aside his drinking
cup with such force it shattered on
the steel deck. He glared at Abaddon,
teeth clenched. ‘Get out, Ezekyle,
before I look to find another first
captain!’ Abaddon glowered back for
a moment, spat on the floor and
stormed from the chamber. The others
stood in stunned silence. Horus
turned, his head bowed.
‘Torgaddon?’ he said quietly.
3,1,5
‘Lord, yes?’ ‘Go after him,
please. Calm him down. Tell him if he
craves my forgiveness in an hour or
two, I might soften enough to hear
him, but he’d better be on his
knees when he does it, and his voice
had better not rise above a
whisper.’ Torgaddon bowed and left
the chamber immediately. Loken and
Aximand glanced at one another, made
an awkward salute, and turned to
follow him out. ‘You two stay,’
Horus growled. They stopped in their
tracks. When they turned back, they
saw the  Warmaster was shaking his
head, wiping a hand across his mouth.
A kind of smile informed his wide-set
eyes. ‘Throne, my sons. How the
3,1,6
molten core of Cthonia burns in us
sometimes.’ Horus sat down on one
of the long, cushioned couches, and
waved to them with a casual flick of
his hand. ‘Hard as a rock, Cthonia,
hot as hell in the heart. Volcanic.
We’ve all known the heat of the
deep mines. We all know how the lava
spurts up sometimes, without warning.
It’s in us all, and it wrought us
all. Hard as rock with a burning
heart. Sit, sit. Take wine. Forgive
my outburst. I’d have you close.
Half a Mournival is better than
nothing.’ They sat on the couch
facing him. Horus took up a fresh
cup, and poured wine from a silver
ewer. ‘The wise one and the quiet
3,1,7
one,’ he said. Loken wasn’t sure
which the Warmaster thought he was.
‘Counsel me, then. You were both
entirely too silent during that
debate.’ Aximand cleared his
throat. ‘Ezekyle had… a point,’
he began. He stiffened as he saw the
Warmaster raise his eyebrows. ‘Go
on, little one.’ ‘We… that is
to say… we prosecute this crusade
according to certain doctrines. For
two centuries, we have done so. Laws
of life, laws on which the Imperium
is founded. They are not arbitrary.
They were given to us, to uphold, by
the Emperor himself.’ ‘Beloved of
all,’ Horus said. ‘The
Emperor’s doctrines have guided us
3,1,8
since the start. We have never
disobeyed them.’ Aximand paused,
then added, ‘Before.’ ‘You
think this is disobedience, little
one?’ Horus asked. Aximand
shrugged. ‘What about you,
Garviel?’ Horus asked. ‘Are you
with Aximand on this?’ Loken looked
back into the Warmaster’s eyes.
‘I know why we ought to make war
upon the interex, sir,’ he said.
‘What interests me is why you think
we shouldn’t.’ Horus smiled.
‘At last, a thinking man.’ He
rose to his feet and, carrying his
cup carefully, walked across to the
right-hand wall of the stateroom, a
section of which had been richly
3,1,9
decorated with a mural. The painting
showed the Emperor, ascendant above
all, catching the spinning
constellations in his outstretched
hand. ‘The stars,’ Horus said.
‘See, there? How he scoops them up?
The zodiacs swirl into his grasp like
fireflies. The stars are mankind’s
birthright. That’s what he told me.
That’s one of the first  things he
told me when we met. I was like a
child then, raised up from nothing.
He set me at his side, and pointed to
the heavens. Those points of light,
he said, are what we have been
waiting generations to master.
Imagine, Horus, every one a human
culture, every one a realm of beauty
3,1,10
and magnificence, free from strife,
free from war, free from bloodshed
and the tyrannous oppression of alien
overlords. Make no mistake, he said,
and they will be ours.’ Horus
slowly traced his fingers across the
whorl of painted stars until his hand
met the image of the Emperor’s
hand. He took his touch away and
looked back at Aximand and Loken.
‘As a foundling, on Cthonia, I saw
the stars very infrequently. The sky
was so often thick with foundry smoke
and ash, but you remember, of
course.’ ‘Yes,’ said Loken.
Little Horus nodded. ‘On those few
nights when the stars were visible, I
wondered at them. Wondered what they
3,1,11
were and what they meant. Little,
mysterious sparks of light, they had
to have some purpose in being there.
I wondered such things every day of
my life until the Emperor came. I was
not surprised when he told me how
important they were.’ ‘I’ll
tell you a thing,’ said Horus,
walking back to them and resuming his
seat. ‘The first thing my father
gave me was an astrological text. It
was a simple thing, a child’s
primer. I have it here somewhere. He
noted my wonder in the stars, and
wished me to learn and understand.’
He paused. Loken was always
captivated whenever Horus began to
refer to the Emperor as ‘my
3,1,12
father’. It had happened a few
times since Loken had been part of
the inner circle, and on every
occasion it had led to unguarded
revelations. ‘There were zodiac
charts in it. In the text.’ Horus
took a sip of his wine and smiled at
the memory. ‘I learned them all. In
one evening. Not just the names, but
the patterns, the associations, the
structure. All twenty signs. The next
day, my father laughed at my appetite
for knowledge. He told me the zodiac
signs were old and unreliable models,
now that the explorator fleets had
begun detailed cosmological mapping.
He told me that the twenty signs in
the heavens would one day be matched
3,1,13
by twenty sons like me. Each son
would embody the character and notion
of a particular zodiac group. He
asked me which one I liked the
best.’ ‘What did you answer?’
Loken asked.  Horus sat back, and
chuckled. ‘I told him I liked all
the patterns they made. I told him I
was glad to finally have names for
the sparks of light in the sky. I
told him I liked Leos, naturally, for
his regal fury, and Skorpos, for his
armour and warlike blade. I told him
that Tauromach appealed to my sense
of stubbornness, and Arbitos to my
sense of fairness and balance.’ The
Warmaster shook his head, sadly.
‘My father said he admired my
3,1,14
choices, but was surprised I had not
picked another in particular. He
showed me again the horseman with the
bow, the galloping warrior. The
dreadful Sagittary, he said. Most
warlike of all. Strong, relentless,
unbridled, swift and sure of his
mark. In ancient times, he told me,
this was the greatest sign of all.
The centaur, the horse-man, the
hunter-warrior, had been beloved in
the old ages. In Anatoly, in his own
childhood, the centaur had been a
revered symbol. A rider upon a horse,
so he said, armed with a bow. The
most potent martial instrument of its
age, conquering all before it. Over
time, myth had blended horseman and
3,1,15
steed into one form. The perfect
synthesis of man and war machine.
That is what you must learn to be, he
told me. That is what you must
master. One day, you must command my
armies, my instruments of war, as if
they were an extension of your own
person. Man and horse, as one,
galloping the heavens, submitting to
no foe. At Ullanor, he gave me
this.’ Horus set down his cup, and
leaned forward to show them the
weathered gold ring he wore on the
smallest finger of his left hand. It
was so eroded by age that the image
was indistinct. Loken thought he
could detect hooves, a man’s arm, a
bent bow. ‘It was made in Persia,
3,1,16
the year before the Emperor was born.
The dreadful Sagittary. This is you
now, he said to me. My Warmaster, my
centaur. Half man, half army,
embedded in the Legions of the
Imperium. Where you turn, so the
Legions turn. Where you move, so they
move. Where you strike, so they
strike. Ride on without me, my son,
and the armies will ride with you.’
There was a long silence. ‘So you
see,’ Horus smiled. ‘I am
predisposed to like the dreadful
Sagittary, now we meet him, face to
face.’ His smile was infectious.
Both Loken and Aximand nodded and
laughed. ‘Now tell them the real
reason,’ a voice said. They turned.
3,1,17
Sanguinius stood in an archway at the
far end of the chamber, behind a veil
of white silk. He had been listening.
The Lord of Angels brushed the silk
hanging aside, and stepped into the
stateroom, the crests of his wings
brushing the glossy material. He was
dressed in a simple white  robe,
clasped at the waist with a girdle of
gold links. He was eating fruit from
a bowl. Loken and Aximand stood up
quickly. ‘Sit down,’ Sanguinius
said. ‘My brother’s in the mood
to open his heart, so you had better
hear the truth.’ ‘I don’t
believe–’ Horus began. Sanguinius
scooped one of the small, red fruits
from his bowl and threw it at Horus.
3,1,18
‘Tell them the rest,’ he
sniggered. Horus caught the thrown
fruit, gazed at it, then bit into it.
He wiped the juice off his chin with
the back of his hand and looked
across at Loken and Aximand.
‘Remember the start of my story?’
he asked. ‘What the Emperor said to
me about the stars? Make no mistake,
and they will .’be ours He took
another two bites, threw the fruit
stone away, and swallowed the flesh
before he continued. ‘Sanguinius,
my dear brother, is right, for
Sanguinius has always been my
conscience.’ Sanguinius shrugged,
an odd gesture for a giant with
furled wings. ‘Make no mistake ,’
3,1,19
Horus continued. ‘Those three
words. Make no mistake. I am
Warmaster, by the Emperor’s decree.
I cannot fail him. I cannot make
mistakes.’ ‘Sir?’ Aximand
ventured. ‘Since Ullanor, little
one, I have made two. Or been party
to two, and that is enough, for the
responsibility for all expedition
mistakes falls to me in the final
count.’ ‘What mistakes?’ asked
Loken. ‘Mistakes.
Misunderstandings.’ Horus stroked
his hand across his brow. ‘Sixty-
Three Nineteen. Our first endeavour.
My first as Warmaster. How much blood
was spilt there, blood from
misunderstanding? We misread the
3,1,20
signs and paid the price. Poor, dear
Sejanus. I miss him still. That whole
war, even that nightmare up on the
mountains you had to endure,
Garviel… a mistake. I could have
handled it differently. Sixty-Three
Nineteen could have been brought to
compliance without bloodshed.’
‘No, sir,’ said Loken
emphatically. ‘They were too set in
their ways, and their ways were set
against us. We could not have made
them compliant without a war.’
Horus shook his head. ‘You are
kind, Garviel, but you are mistaken.
There  were ways. There should have
been ways. I should have been able to
sway that civilisation without a shot
3,1,21
being fired. The Emperor would have
done so.’ ‘I don’t believe he
would,’ Aximand said. ‘Then
there’s Murder,’ Horus continued,
ignoring Little Horus’s remark.
‘Or Spiderland, as the interex has
it. What is the way of their name for
it again?’ ‘Urisarach,’
Sanguinius said, helpfully. ‘Though
I think the word only works with the
appropriate harmonic
accompaniment.’ ‘Spiderland will
suffice, then,’ said Horus. ‘What
did we waste there? What
misunderstandings did we make? The
interex left us warnings to stay
away, and we ignored them. An
embargoed world, an asylum for the
3,1,22
creatures they had bested in war, and
we walked straight in.’ ‘We
weren’t to know,’ Sanguinius
said. ‘We should have known!’
Horus snapped. ‘Therein lies the
difference between our philosophy and
that of the interex,’ Aximand said.
‘We cannot endure the existence of
a malign alien race. They subjugate
it, but refrain from annihilating it.
Instead, they deprive it of space
travel and exile it to a prison
world.’ ‘We annihilate,’ said
Horus. ‘They find a means around
such drastic measures. Which of us is
the most humane?’ Aximand rose to
his feet. ‘I find myself with
Ezekyle on this. Tolerance is
3,1,23
weakness. The interex is admirable,
but it is forgiving and generous in
its dealings with xenos breeds who
deserve no quarter.’ ‘It has
brought them to book, and learned to
live in sympathy,’ said Horus.
‘It has trained the kinebrach
to–’ ‘And that’s the best
example I can offer!’ Aximand
replied. ‘The kinebrach. It
embraces them as part of its
culture.’ ‘I will not make
another rash or premature
decision,’ Horus stated flatly.
‘I have made too many, and my
Warmastery is threatened by my
mistakes. I will understand the
interex, and learn from it, and
3,1,24
parlay with it, and only then will I
decide if it has strayed too far.
They are a fine people. Perhaps we
can learn from them for a change.’
The music was hard to get used to.
Sometimes it was magisterial and
loud,  especially when the meturge
players struck up, and sometimes it
was just a quiet whisper, like a
buzz, like tinnitus, but it seldom
went away. The people of the interex
called it the aria, and it was a
fundamental part of their
communication. They still used
language – indeed, their spoken
language was an evolved human dialect
closer in form to the prime language
of Terra than Cthonic – but they
3,1,25
had long ago formulated the aria as
an accompaniment and enhancement of
speech, and as a mode of translation.
Scrutinised by the iterators during
the voyage, the aria proved to be
hard to define. Essentially, it was a
form of high mathematics, a universal
constant that transcended linguistic
barriers, but the mathematical
structures were expressed through
specific harmonic and melodic modes
which, to the untrained ear, sounded
like music. Strands of complex melody
rang in the background of all the
interex’s vocal transmissions, and
when one of their kind spoke face to
face, it was usual to have one or
more of the meturge players accompany
3,1,26
his speech with their instruments.
The meturge players were the
translators and envoys. Tall, like
all the people of the interex, they
wore long coats of a glossy, green
fibre, laced with slender gold
piping. The flesh of their ears was
distended and splayed, by genetic and
surgical enhancement, like the ears
of bats or other nocturnal fliers.
Comm technology, the equivalent of
vox, was laced around the high
collars of their coats, and each one
carried an instrument strapped across
his chest, a device with amplifiers
and coiled pipes, and numerous
digital keys on which the meturge
player’s nimble fingers constantly
3,1,27
rested. A swan-necked mouthpiece rose
from the top of each instrument,
enabling the player to blow, hum, or
vocalise into the device. The first
meeting between Imperium and interex
had been formal and cautious. Envoys
came aboard the Vengeful Spirit ,
escorted by meturge players and
soldiers. The envoys were uniformly
handsome and lean, with piercing
eyes. Their hair was dressed short,
and intricate dermatoglyphics –
Loken suspected permanent tattoos –
decorated either the left or right-
hand sides of their faces. They wore
knee-length robes of a soft, pale
blue cloth, under which they were
dressed in close-fitting clothing
3,1,28
woven from the same, glossy fibre
that composed the meturge players’
coats. The soldiers were impressive.
Fifty of them, led by officers, had
descended from their shuttle. Taller
than the envoys, they were clad from
crown to toe in  metal armour of
burnished silver and emerald green
with aposematic chevrons of scarlet.
The armour was of almost delicate
design, and sheathed their bodies
tightly; it was in no way as massive
or heavy-set as the Astartes’
plate. The soldiers – variously
gleves or sagittars, Loken learned
– were almost as tall as the
Astartes, but with their far more
slender build and more closely fitted
3,1,29
armour, they seemed slight compared
to the Imperial giants. Abaddon, at
the first meeting, muttered that he
doubted their fancy armour would
stand even a slap. Their weapons
caused more remarks. Most of the
soldiers had swords sheathed across
their backs. Some, the gleves,
carried long-bladed metal spears with
heavy ball counterweights on the base
ends. The others, the sagittars,
carried recurve bows wrought from
some dark metal. The sagittars had
sheaves of long, flightless darts
laced to their right thighs.
‘Bows?’ Torgaddon whispered.
‘Really? They stun us with the
power and scale of their vessels,
3,1,30
then come aboard carrying bows?’
‘They’re probably ceremonial,’
Aximand murmured. The soldier
officers wore serrated half-discs
across the skulls of their helmets.
The visors of their close-fitting
helms were all alike: the metal
modelled to the lines of brow and
cheekbone and nose, with simple oval
eyeslits that were backlit blue. The
mouth and chin area of each visor was
built out, like a thrusting,
pugnacious jaw, containing a
communication module. Behind the
slender soldiers, as a further
escort, came heavier forms. Shorter,
and far more thick-set, these men
were similarly armoured, though in
3,1,31
browns and golds. Loken supposed them
to be heavy troopers, their bodies
gene-bred for bulk and muscle,
designed for close combat, but they
carried no weapons. There were twenty
of them, and they flanked five
robotic creatures, slender, silver
quadrupeds of intricate and elegant
design, made to resemble the finest
Terra-stock horses, except that they
possessed no heads or necks.
‘Artificials,’ Horus whispered
aside to Maloghurst. ‘Make sure
Master Regulus is observing this via
the pict feed. I’ll want his notes
later.’ One of the flagship’s
embarkation decks had been entirely
cleared for the ceremonial meeting.
3,1,32
Imperial banners had been hung along
the vault, and the whole of First
Company assembled in full plate as an
honour guard. The Astartes formed two
unwavering blocks of white figures,
rigid and still, their  front rows a
glossy black line of Justaerin
Terminators. In the aisle between the
two formations, Horus stood with the
Mournival, Maloghurst and other
senior officials like Ing Mae Sing.
The Warmaster and his lieutenants
wore full armour and cloaks, though
Horus’s head was bare. They watched
the heavy interex shuttle move
ponderously down the lighted runway
of the deck, and settle on polished
skids. Then hatch-ramps in its prow
3,1,33
opened, the white metal unfolding
like giant origami puzzles, and the
envoys and their escorts disembarked.
In total, with the soldiers and the
meturge players, there were over one
hundred of them. They came to a halt,
with the envoys in a line at the
front and the escort arranged in
perfect symmetry behind. Forty-eight
hours of intense intership
communication had preceded that
cautious moment. Forty-eight hours of
delicate diplomacy. Horus gave a nod,
and the men of First Company chested
their weapons and bowed their heads
in one, loud, unified motion. Horus
himself stepped forward and walked
alone down the aisle space, his cloak
3,1,34
billowing behind him. He came face to
face with what seemed to be the
senior envoy, made the sign of the
aquila, and bowed. ‘I greet you
on–’ he began. The moment he
started speaking, the meturge players
began sounding their instruments
softly. Horus stopped. ‘Translation
form,’ the envoy said, his own
words accompanied by meturge playing.
‘It is disconcerting,’ Horus
smiled. ‘For purposes of clarity
and comprehension,’ the envoy said.
‘We appear to understand each other
well enough,’ Horus smiled. The
envoy nodded curtly. ‘Then I will
tell the players to stop,’ he said.
‘No,’ said Horus. ‘Let us be
3,1,35
natural. If this is your way.’
Again, the envoy nodded. The exchange
continued, surrounded by the oddly
melodied playing. ‘I greet you on
behalf of the Emperor of Mankind,
beloved by all, and in the name of
the Imperium of Terra.’ ‘On
behalf of the society of the interex,
I accept your greetings and return
them.’ ‘Thank you,’ said Horus.
‘Of the first thing,’ the envoy
said. ‘You are from Terra?’
‘Yes.’ ‘From old Terra, that
was also called Earth?’ ‘Yes.’
‘This can be verified?’ ‘By all
means,’ smiled Horus. ‘You know
of Terra?’ An odd expression, like
a pang, crossed the envoy’s face,
3,1,36
and he glanced round at his
colleagues. ‘We are from Terra.
Ancestrally. Genetically. It was our
origin world, eons ago. If you are
truly of Terra, then this is a
momentous occasion. For the first
time in thousands of years, the
interex has established contact with
its lost cousins.’ ‘It is our
purpose in the stars,’ Horus said,
‘to find all the lost families of
man, cast away so long ago.’ The
envoy bowed his head. ‘I am Diath
Shehn, abbrocarius.’ ‘I am Horus,
Warmaster.’ The music of the
meturge players made a slight, but
noticeably discordant sound as it
expressed ‘Warmaster’. Shehn
3,1,37
frowned. ‘Warmaster?’ he
repeated. ‘The rank given to me
personally by the Emperor of Mankind,
so that I may act as his most senior
lieutenant.’ ‘It is a robust
title. Bellicose. Is your fleet a
military undertaking?’ ‘It has a
military component. Space is too
dangerous for us to roam unarmed. But
from the look of your fine soldiers,
abbrocarius, so does yours.’ Shehn
pursed his lips. ‘You laid assault
to Urisarach, with great aggression
and vehemence, and in disregard to
the advisory beacons we had
positioned in the system. It would
appear your military component is a
considerable one.’ ‘We will
3,1,38
discuss this in detail later,
abbrocarius. If an apology needs to
be made, you will hear it directly
from me. First, let me welcome you in
peace.’ Horus turned, and made a
signal. The entire company of
Astartes, and the plated officers,
locked off their weapons and removed
their helms. Human faces, row after
row. Openness, not hostility. Shehn
and the other envoys bowed, and made
a signal of their own, a signal
supported by a musical sequence. The
warriors of the interex removed their
visors, displaying clean, hard-eyed
faces. Except for the squat figures,
the heavy troops in brown and gold.
When their helmets came off, they
3,1,39
revealed faces that weren’t human
at all.  They were called the
kinebrach. An advanced, mature
species, they had been an
interstellar culture for over fifteen
thousand years. They had already
founded a strong, multi-world
civilisation in the local region of
space before Terra had entered its
First Age of Technology, an era when
humanity was only just feeling its
way beyond the Solar system in sub-
light vehicles. By the time the
interex encountered them, their
culture was aging and fading. A
territorial war developed after
initial contact, and lasted for a
century. Despite the kinebrach’s
3,1,40
superior technology, the humans of
the interex were victorious, but, in
victory, they did not annihilate the
aliens. Rapprochement was achieved,
thanks in part to the interex’s
willingness to develop the aria to
facilitate a more profound level of
inter-species communication. Faced
with options including further
warfare and exile, the kinebrach
elected to become client citizens of
the expanding interex. It suited them
to place their tired, flagging
destiny in the charge of the vigorous
and progressive humans. Culturally
bonded as junior partners in society,
the kinebrach shared their
technological advances by way of
3,1,41
exchange. For three thousand years,
the interex humans had successfully
co-existed with the kinebrach.
‘Conflict with the kinebrach was
our first significant alien war,’
Diath Shehn explained. He was seated
with the other envoys in the
Warmaster’s audience chamber. The
Mournival was present, and meturge
players lined the walls, gently
accompanying the talks. ‘It taught
us a great deal. It taught us about
our place in the cosmos, and certain
values of compassion, understanding
and empathy. The aria developed
directly from it, as a tool for use
in further dealings with non-human
parties. The war made us realise that
3,1,42
our very humanity, or at least our
trenchant dependance on human traits,
such as language, was an obstacle to
mature relations with other
species.’ ‘No matter how
sophisticated the means,
abbrocarius,’ Abaddon said,
‘sometimes communication is not
enough. In our experience, most xenos
types are wilfully hostile.
Communication and bargaining is not
an option.’ The first captain, like
many present, was uncomfortable. The
entire interex party had been
permitted to enter the audience
chamber, and the kinebrach were
attending at the far end. Abaddon
kept glancing at them. They were
3,1,43
hefty, simian things with eyes so
oddly sunken beneath big brow ridges
that  they were just sparks in
shadows. Their flesh was blue-black,
and deeply creased, with fringes of
russet hair, so fine it was almost
like feather-down, surrounding the
bases of their heavy, angular
craniums. Mouth and nose was one
organ, a trifold split at the end of
their blunt jaw-snouts, capable of
peeling back, wet and pink, to sniff,
or opening laterally to reveal a comb
of small, sharp teeth like a
dolphin’s beak. There was a smell
to them, a distinctive earthy smell
that wasn’t exactly unpleasant,
except that it was entirely and
3,1,44
completely not human. ‘This we have
found ourselves,’ Shehn agreed,
‘though it would seem less
frequently than you. Sometimes we
have encountered a species that has
no wish to exchange with us, that
approaches us with predatory or
invasive intent. Sometimes conflict
is the only option. Such was the case
with the… What did you say you
called them again?’
‘Megarachnid,’ Horus smiled.
Shehn nodded and smiled. ‘I see how
that word is formed, from the old
roots. The megarachnid were highly
advanced, but not sentient in a way
we could understand. They existed
only to reproduce and develop
3,1,45
territory. When we first met them,
they infested eight systems along the
Shartiel Edge of our provinces, and
threatened to invade and choke two of
our populated worlds. We went to war,
to safeguard our own interests. In
the end, we were victorious, but
there was still no opportunity for
rapprochement or peace terms. We
gathered all the megarachnid
remaining into captivity, and
transported them to Urisarach. We
also deprived them of all their
interstellar technology, or the means
to manufacture the same. Urisarach
was created as a reservation for
them, where they might exist without
posing a threat to ourselves or
3,1,46
others. The interdiction beacons were
established to warn others away.’
‘You did not consider exterminating
them?’ Maloghurst asked. Shehn
shook his head. ‘What right do we
have to make another species extinct?
In most cases, an understanding can
be reached. The megarachnid were an
extreme example, where exile was the
only humane option.’ ‘The
approach you describe is a
fascinating one,’ Horus said
quickly, seeing that Abaddon was
about to speak again. ‘I believe it
is time for that apology,
abbrocarius. We misunderstood your
methods and purpose on Urisarach. We
violated your reservation. The
3,1,47
Imperium apologises for its
transgression.’  
3,1,48
TWO
 Envoys and
delegations Xenobia Hall of Devices
Abaddon was furious. Once the interex
envoys had returned to their vessels,
he withdrew with the others of the
Mournival and vented his feelings.
‘Six months! Six months warring on
Murder! How many great deeds, how
many brothers lost? And now he
apologises? As if it was an error? A
mistake? These xenos-loving bastards
even admit themselves the spiders
were so dangerous they had to lock
them away!’ ‘It’s a difficult
situation,’ Loken said. ‘It’s
an insult to the honour of our
Legion! And to the Angels too!’
3,2,1
‘It takes a wise and strong man to
know when to apologise,’ remarked
Aximand. ‘And only a fool appeases
aliens!’ Abaddon snarled. ‘What
has this crusade taught us?’
‘That we’re very good at killing
things that disagree with us?’
suggested Torgaddon. Abaddon glared
at him. ‘We know how brutal this
cosmos is. How cruel. We must fight
for our place in it. Name one species
we have met that would not rejoice to
see mankind vanished in a blink.’
None of them could answer that.
‘Only a fool appeases aliens,’
Abaddon repeated, ‘or appeases
those who seek such appeasement.’
‘Are you calling the Warmaster a
3,2,2
fool?’ Loken asked. Abaddon
hesitated. ‘No. No, I’m not. Of
course. I serve at his will.’
‘We have one duty,’ Aximand said,
‘as the Mournival, we must speak
with one mind when we advise him.’
Torgaddon nodded. ‘No,’ said
Loken. ‘That’s not why he values
us. We must tell him what we think,
each one of us, even if we disagree.
And let him decide. That is our
duty.’ Meetings with the various
interex envoys continued over a
period of days. Sometimes the interex
ships sent a mission to the Vengeful
Spirit , sometimes an Imperial
embassy crossed to their command ship
and was entertained in glittering
3,2,3
chambers of silver and glass where
the aria filled the air. The envoys
were hard to read. Their behaviour
often seemed superior or
condescending, as if they regarded
the Imperials as crude and
unsophisticated. But still, clearly,
they were fascinated. The legends of
old Terra and the human bloodline had
long been a central tenet of their
myths and histories. However
disappointing the reality, they could
not bear to break off contact with
their treasured ancestral past.
Eventually, a summit was proposed,
whereby the Warmaster and his
entourage would travel to the nearest
interex outpost world, and conduct
3,2,4
more detailed negotiations with
higher representatives than the
envoys. The Warmaster took advice
from all quarters, though Loken was
sure he had already made up his mind.
Some, like Abaddon, counselled that
links should be broken, and the
interex held at abeyance until
sufficient forces could be assembled
to annex their territories. There
were other matters at hand that
urgently demanded the Warmaster’s
attention, matters that had been
postponed for too long while he
indulged in the six-month spider-war
on Murder. Petitions and salutations
were being received on a daily basis.
Five primarchs had requested his
3,2,5
personal audience on matters of
general crusade strategy or for
councils of war. One, the Lion, had
never made such an approach before,
and it was a sign of a welcome
thawing in relations, one that Horus
could not afford to overlook. Thirty-
six expedition fleets had sent
signals asking for advice, tactical
determination or outright martial
assistance. Matters of state also
mounted. There was now a vast body of
bureaucratic material relayed from
the Council of Terra that required
the Warmaster’s direct attention.
He had been putting it off for too
long, blaming the demands  of the
crusade. Accompanying the Warmaster
3,2,6
on most of his daily duties, Loken
began to see plainly what a burden
the Emperor had placed on Horus’s
broad shoulders. He was expected to
be all things: a commander of armies,
a mastermind of compliance, a judge,
a decider, a tactician, and the most
delicate of diplomats. During the
six-month war, more ships had arrived
at high anchor above Murder,
gathering around the flagship like
supplicants. The rest of the 63rd
Expedition had translated, under
Varvarus’s charge, Sixty-Three
Nineteen having at last been left in
the lonely hands of poor Rakris.
Fourteen vessels of the 88th
Expedition had also appeared, under
3,2,7
the command of Trajus Boniface of the
Alpha Legion. Boniface claimed they
had come in response to the 140th’s
plight, and hoped to support the war
action on Murder, but it rapidly
emerged he hoped to use the
opportunity to convince Horus to lend
the 63rd’s strengths to a proposed
offensive into ork-held territories
in the Kayvas Belt. This was a scheme
his primarch, Alpharius, had long
cherished and, like the Lion’s
advances, was a sign that Alpharius
sought the approval and comradeship
of the new Warmaster. Horus studied
the plans in private. The Kayvas Belt
offensive was a projected five-year
operation, and required ten times the
3,2,8
manpower the Warmaster could
currently muster. ‘Alpharius is
dreaming,’ he muttered, showing the
scheme to Loken and Torgaddon. ‘I
cannot commit myself to this.’ One
of Varvaras’s ships had brought
with it a delegation of eaxector
tributi administrators from Terra.
This was perhaps the most galling of
all the voices baying for the
Warmaster’s attention. On the
instruction of Malcador the
Sigillite, and countersigned by the
Council of Terra, the eaxectors had
been sent throughout the spreading
territories of the Imperium, in a
programme of general dispersal that
made the mass deployment of the
3,2,9
remembrancers look like a modest
operation. The delegation was led by
a high administrix called Aenid
Rathbone. She was a tall, slender,
handsome woman with red hair and
pale, high-boned features, and her
manner was exacting. The Council of
Terra had decreed that all expedition
and crusade forces, all primarchs,
all commanders, and all governors of
compliant world-systems should begin
raising and collecting taxes from
their subject planets in order to
bolster the increasing fiscal
demands of the expanding Imperium.
All she insisted on talking about was
the collection of tithes. ‘One
world cannot support and maintain
3,2,10
such a gigantic undertaking
singlehanded,’ she explained to the
Warmaster in slightly over-shrill
tones. ‘Terra cannot shoulder this
burden alone. We are masters of a
thousand worlds now, a thousand
thousand. The Imperium must begin to
support itself.’ ‘Many worlds are
barely in compliance, lady,’ Horus
said gently. ‘They are recovering
from the damage of war, rebuilding,
reforming. Taxation is a blight they
do not need.’ ‘The Emperor has
insisted this be so.’ ‘Has he?’
‘Malcador the Sigillite, beloved by
all, has impressed this upon me and
all of my rank. Tribute must be
collected, and mechanisms established
3,2,11
so that such tribute is routinely and
automatically gathered.’ ‘The
world governors we have put in place
will find this too thankless a
task,’ Maloghurst said. ‘They are
still legitimising their rule and
authority. This is premature.’
‘The Emperor has insisted this be
so,’ she repeated. ‘That’s the
Emperor, beloved by all?’ Loken
asked. His comment made Horus smile
broadly. Rathbone sniffed. ‘I’m
not sure what you’re implying,
captain,’ she said. ‘This is my
duty, and this is what I must do.’
When she had retired from the room
with her staff, Horus sat back, alone
amongst his inner circle. ‘I have
3,2,12
often thought,’ he remarked,
‘that it might be the eldar who
unseat us. Though fading, they are
the most ingenious creatures, and if
any could over-master mankind and
break our Imperium apart, it would
likely be them. At other times, I
have fancied that it would be the
greenskins. No end of numbers and no
end of brute strength, but now,
friends, I am certain it will be our
own tax collectors who will do us
in.’ There was general laughter.
Loken thought of the poem in his
pocket. Most of Karkasy’s output he
handed on to Sindermann for
appraisal, but at their last meeting,
Karkasy had introduced ‘something
3,2,13
of the doggerel’. Loken had read
it. It had been a scurrilous and
mordant stanza about tax collectors
that even Loken could appreciate. He
thought about bringing it out for
general amusement, but Horus’s face
had darkened.  ‘I only half
joke,’ Horus said. ‘Through the
eaxectors, the Council places a
burden on the fledgling worlds that
is so great it might break us. It is
too soon, too comprehensive, too
stringent. Worlds will revolt.
Uprisings will occur. Tell a
conquered man he has a new master,
and he’ll shrug. Tell him his new
master wants a fifth of his annual
income, and he’ll go and find his
3,2,14
pitchfork. Aenid Rathbone, and
administrators like her, will be the
undoing of all we have achieved.’
More laughter echoed round the room.
‘But it is the Emperor’s will,’
Torgaddon remarked. Horus shook his
head. ‘It is not, for all she says.
I know him as a son knows his father.
He would not agree to this. Not now,
not this early. He must be too bound
up in his work to know of it. The
Council is making decisions in his
absence. The Emperor understands how
fragile things are. Throne, this is
what happens when an empire forged by
warriors devolves executive power to
civilians and clerics.’ They all
looked at him. ‘I’m serious,’
3,2,15
he said. ‘This could trigger civil
war in certain regions. At the very
least, it could undermine the
continued work of our expeditions.
The eaxectors need to be… sidelined
for the moment. They should be given
terrific weights of material to pore
through to determine precise tribute
levels, world by world, and bombarded
with copious additional intelligence
concerning each world’s status.’
‘It won’t slow them down forever,
lord,’ Maloghurst said. ‘The
Administration of Terra has already
determined systems and measures by
which tribute should be calculated,
pro rata, world by world.’ ‘Do
your best, Mal,’ Horus said.
3,2,16
‘Delay that woman at least. Give me
breathing space.’ ‘I’ll get to
it,’ Maloghurst said. He rose and
limped from the chamber. Horus turned
to the assembled circle and sighed.
‘So…’ he said. ‘The Lion
calls for me. Alpharius too.’
‘And other brothers and numerous
expeditions,’ Sanguinius remarked.
‘And it seems my wisest option is
to return to Terra and confront the
Council on the issue of taxation.’
Sanguinius sniggered. ‘I was not
wrought to do that,’ Horus said.
‘Then we should consider the
interex, lord,’ said Erebus.
Erebus, of the Word Bearers Legion,
the XVII, had joined them a fortnight
3,2,17
earlier as part of the contingent
brought by Varvaras. In his stone-
grey Mark IV plate, inscribed with
bas-relief legacies of his deeds,
Erebus was a sombre, serious figure.
His rank in the XVII was first
chaplain, roughly equivalent to that
of Abaddon or Eidolon. He was a
senior commander of that Legion,
close to Kor Phaeron and the
primarch, Lorgar, himself. His quiet
manner and soft, composed voice
commanded instant respect from all
who met him, but the Luna Wolves had
embraced him anyway. The Wolves had
historically enjoyed a relationship
with the Bearers as close as the one
they had formed with the Emperor’s
3,2,18
Children. It was no coincidence that
Horus counted Lorgar amongst his most
intimate brothers, alongside Fulgrim
and Sanguinius. Erebus, who time had
fashioned as much into a statesman as
a warrior, both of which duties he
performed with superlative skill, had
come to find the Warmaster at the
behest of his Legion. Evidently, he
had a favour to crave, a request to
make. One did not send Erebus except
to broker terms. However, on his
arrival, Erebus had understood
immediately the pressure laid at
Horus’s door, the countless voices
screaming for attention. He had
shelved his reason for coming,
wishing to add nothing to the
3,2,19
Warmaster’s already immense burden,
and had instead acted as a solid
counsel and advisor with no agenda of
his own. For this, the Mournival had
admired him greatly, and welcomed
him, like Raldorus, into the circle.
Abaddon and Aximand had served
alongside Erebus in numerous
theatres. Torgaddon knew him of old.
All three spoke in nothing but the
highest terms of First Chaplain
Erebus. Loken had needed little
convincing. From the outset, Erebus
had made a particular effort to
establish good terms with Loken.
Erebus’s record and heritage were
such that he seemed to Loken to carry
the weight of a primarch with him. He
3,2,20
was, after all, Lorgar’s chosen
mouthpiece. Erebus had dined with
them, counselled with them, sat easy
after hours and drunk with them, and,
on occasions, had entered the
practice cages and sparred with them.
In one afternoon, he had bested
Torgaddon and Aximand in quick bouts,
then tallied long with Saul Tarvitz
before dumping him on the mat.
Tarvitz and his comrade Lucius had
been brought along at Torgaddon’s
invitation. Loken had wanted to test
his hand against Erebus, but Lucius
had insisted he was next. The
Mournival had grown to like Tarvitz,
their impression of him favourably
influenced by Torgaddon’s good
3,2,21
opinions, but Lucius remained a
separate entity, too much like Lord
Eidolon for them to warm to him. He
always appeared plaintive and
demanding, like a spoilt child.
‘You go, then,’ Loken had waved,
‘if it matters so much.’ It was
clear that Lucius strained to restore
the honour of his Legion, an honour
lost, as he saw it, the moment Erebus
had dropped Tarvitz with a skillful
slam of his sword. Drawing his blade,
Lucius had entered the practice cage
facing Erebus. The iron hemispheres
closed around them. Lucius took up a
straddled stance, his broadsword held
high and close. Erebus kept his own
blade extended low. They circled.
3,2,22
Both Astartes were stripped to the
waist, the musculature of their upper
bodies rippling. This was play, but a
wrong move could maim. Or kill. The
bout lasted sixteen minutes. That in
itself would have made it one of the
longest sparring sessions any of them
had ever known. What made it more
remarkable was the fact that in that
time, there was no pause, no
hesitation, no cessation. Erebus and
Lucius flew at one another, and rang
blows off one another’s blades at a
rate of three or four a second. It
was relentless, extraordinary, a
dizzying blur of dancing bodies and
gleaming swords that rang on and on
like a dream. Abaddon, Tarvitz,
3,2,23
Torgaddon, Loken and Aximand closed
around the cage in fascination,
beginning to clap and yell in
thorough approval of the amazing
skill on display. ‘He’ll kill
him!’ Tarvitz gasped. ‘At that
speed, unprotected. He’ll kill
him!’ ‘Who will?’ asked Loken.
‘I don’t know, Garvi. Either
one!’ Tarvitz exclaimed. ‘Too
much, too much!’ Aximand laughed.
‘Loken fights the winner,’
Torgaddon cried. ‘I don’t think
so!’ Loken rejoined. ‘I’ve seen
winner and loser!’ Still they
duelled on. Erebus’s style was
defensive, low, repeating and
changing each parry like a mechanism.
3,2,24
Lucius’s style was full of attack,
furious, brilliant, dextrous. The
play of them was hard to follow.
‘If you think I’m taking on
either of them after this,’ Loken
began.  ‘What? Can’t you do
it?’ Torgaddon mocked. ‘No.’
‘You go in next,’ chuckled
Abaddon, clapping his hands.
‘We’ll give you a bolter to even
it up.’ ‘How very humorous,
Ezekyle.’ At the fifty-ninth second
of the sixteenth minute, according to
the practice cage chron, Lucius
scored his winning blow. He hooked
his broadsword under Erebus’s guard
and wrenched the Word Bearer’s
blade out of his grip. Erebus fell
3,2,25
back against the bars of the practice
cage, and found Lucius’s blade edge
at his throat. ‘Whoa! Whoa now,
Lucius!’ Aximand cried, triggering
the cage open. ‘Sorry,’ said
Lucius, not sorry at all. He withdrew
his broadsword and saluted Erebus,
sweat beading his bare shoulders ‘A
good match. Thank you, sir.’ ‘My
thanks to you,’ Erebus smiled,
breathing hard. He bent to pick up
his blade. ‘Your skill with a sword
is second to none, Captain Lucius.’
‘Out you come, Erebus,’ Torgaddon
called. ‘It’s Garvi’s turn.’
‘Oh no,’ Loken said. ‘You’re
the best of us with a blade,’
Little Horus insisted. ‘Show him
3,2,26
how the Luna Wolves do it.’
‘Skill with a blade isn’t
everything,’ Loken protested.
‘Just get in there and stop shaming
us,’ Aximand hissed. He looked over
at Lucius, who was wiping his torso
down with a cloth. ‘You ready for
another, Lucius?’ ‘Bring it
on.’ ‘He’s mad,’ Loken
whispered. ‘Legion honour,’
Abaddon muttered back, pushing Loken
forward. ‘That’s right,’ crowed
Lucius. ‘Anyway you want me. Show
me how a Luna Wolf fights, Loken.
Show me how you win.’ ‘It’s not
just about the blade,’ Loken said.
‘However you want it,’ Lucius
snorted. Erebus stood up from the
3,2,27
corner of the platform and tossed his
blade to Loken. ‘It sounds like
it’s your turn, Garviel,’ he
said. Loken caught the sword, and
tested it through the air, back and
forth. He stepped up into the cage
and nodded. The hemispheres of bars
closed around him and Lucius.  Lucius
spat and shook out his shoulders. He
turned his sword and began to dance
around Loken. ‘I’m no
swordsman,’ Loken said. ‘Then
this will be over quickly.’ ‘If
we spar, it won’t be just about the
blade.’ ‘Whatever, whatever,’
Lucius called, jumping back and
forth. ‘Just get on and fight
me.’ Loken sighed. ‘I’ve been
3,2,28
watching you, of course, the
attacking strokes. I can read you.’
‘You wish.’ ‘I can read you.
Come for me.’ Lucius lunged at
Loken. Loken side-stepped, blade
down, and punched Lucius in the face.
Lucius fell on his back, hard. Loken
dropped Erebus’s sword onto the
mat. ‘I think I made my point.
That’s how a Luna Wolf fights.
Understand your foe and do whatever
is necessary to bring him down.
Sorry, Lucius.’ Spitting blood,
Lucius’s response was incoherent.
‘I said we should consider the
interex, sir,’ Erebus pressed.
‘We should,’ Horus replied,
‘and my mind is made up. All these
3,2,29
voices calling for my attention,
pulling me this way and that. They
can’t disguise the fact that the
interex is a significant new culture,
occupying a significant region of
space. They’re human. We can’t
ignore them. We can’t deny their
existence. We must deal with them
directly. Either they are friends,
potential allies, or they are
enemies. We cannot turn our attention
elsewhere and expect them to stay
put. If they are enemies, if they are
against us, then they could pose a
threat as great as the greenskins. I
will go to the summit and meet their
leaders.’ Xenobia was a provincial
capital on the marches of interex
3,2,30
territory. The envoys had been
guarded in revelations of the precise
size and extent of the interex, but
their cultural holdings evidently
occupied in excess of thirty systems,
with the heartworlds some forty weeks
from the advancing edge of Imperial
influence. Xenobia, a gateway world
and a sentinel station on the edge of
interex space, was chosen as the site
for the summit.  It was a place of
considerable wonder. Escorted from
mass anchorage points in the orbit of
the principal satellite, the
Warmaster and his representatives
were conducted to Xenobia Principis,
a wealthy, regal city on the shores
of a wide, ammonia sea. The city was
3,2,31
set into the slopes of a wide bay, so
that it shelved down the ramparts of
the hills to sea level. The
continental region behind it was
sheathed in verdant rainforest, and
this lush growth spilled down through
the city too, so that the city
structures – towers of pale grey
stone and turrets of brass and silver
– rose up out of the thick canopy
like hilltop peaks. The vegetation
was predominately dark green, indeed
so dark in colour it seemed almost
black in the frail, yellow daylight.
The city was structured in descending
tiers under the trees, where arched
stone viaducts and curved street
galleries stepped down to the
3,2,32
shoreline in the quiet, mottled
shadow of the greenery. Where the
grey towers and ornate campaniles
rose above the forest, they were
often capped in polished metal, and
adorned with high masts from which
flags and standards hung in the warm
air. It was not a fortress city.
There was little evidence of defences
either on the ground or in local
orbit. Horus was in no doubt that the
place could protect itself if
necessary. The interex did not wear
its martial power as obviously as the
Imperium, but its technology was not
to be underestimated. The Imperial
party was over five hundred strong
and included Astartes officers,
3,2,33
escort troops and iterators, as well
as a selection of remembrancers.
Horus had authorised the latter’s
inclusion. This was a fact-finding
mission, and the Warmaster thought
the eager, inquisitive remembrancers
might gather a great deal of
supplementary material that would
prove valuable. Loken believed that
the Warmaster was also making an
effort to establish a rather
different impression than before. The
envoys of the interex had seemed so
disdainful of the expedition’s
military bias. Horus came to them
now, surrounded as much by teachers,
poets and artists as he was warriors.
They were provided with excellent
3,2,34
accommodation in the western part of
the city, in a quarter known as the
Extranus , where, they were politely
informed, all ‘strangers and
visitors’ were reserved and hosted.
Xenobia Principis was a place
designed for trade delegations and
diplomatic meetings, with the
Extranus set aside to keep guests
reserved in one place. They were
handsomely provided with meturge
players, household servants, and
court officers to see to their every
need and answer any questions.  Under
the guided escort of abbrocarii, the
Imperials were allowed beyond the
shaded compound of the Extranus to
visit the city. In small groups, they
3,2,35
were shown the wonders of the place:
halls of trade and industry, museums
of art and music, archives and
libraries. In the green twilight of
the galleried streets, under the
hissing canopy of the trees, they
were guided along fine avenues,
through splendid squares, and up and
down endless flights of steps. The
city was home to buildings of
exquisite design, and it was clear
the interex possessed great skill in
both the old crafts of stonemasonry
and metalwork, and the newer crafts
of technology. Pavements abounded
with gorgeous statuary and tranquil
water fountains, but also with
modernist public sculpture of light
3,2,36
and sonics. Ancient lancet window
slits were equipped with glass panels
reactive to light and heat. Doors
opened and closed via automatic body
sensors. Interior light levels could
be adjusted by a wave of the hand.
Everywhere, the soft melody of the
aria played. The Imperium possessed
many cities that were larger and
grander and more cyclopean. The
super-hives of Terra and the silver
spires of Prospero both were
stupendous monuments to cultural
advancement that quite diminished
Xenobia Principis. But the interex
city was every bit as refined and
sophisticated as any conurbation in
Imperial space, and it was merely a
3,2,37
border settlement. On the day of
their arrival, the Imperials were
welcomed by a great parade, which
culminated in their presentation to
the senior royal officer of Xenobia,
a ‘general commander’ named
Jephta Naud. There were high-ranking
civil officers in the interex party
too, but they had decided to allow a
military leader to oversee the
summit. Just as Horus had diluted the
martial composition of his embassy to
impress the interex, so it had
brought its military powers to the
fore. The parade was complex and
colourful. Meturge players marched in
great numbers, dressed in rich formal
robes, and performed skirling anthems
3,2,38
that were as much non-verbal messages
of welcome as they were mood-setting
music. Gleves and sagittars strode in
long, uniform columns, their armour
polished brightly and dressed with
garlands of ribbons and leaves.
Behind the human soldiery came the
kinebrach auxiliaries, armoured and
lumbering, and glittering formations
of robotic cavalry. The cavalry was
made up of hundreds of the headless
artificial horses that had featured
in the envoys’ honour guard. They
were headless no longer. Sagittars
and gleves had  mounted the quadruped
frames, seating themselves where the
base of the neck would have been.
Warrior armour and robot technology
3,2,39
had fused smoothly, locking the
‘riders’ in place, their legs
folded into the breastbones of the
steeds. They were centaurs now, man
and device linked as one, myths given
technological reality. The citizenry
of Xenobia Principis came out in
force for the parade, and cheered and
sang, and strewed the route of the
procession with petals and strips of
ribbon. The parade’s destination
was a building called the Hall of
Devices, a place which apparently had
some military significance to the
interex. Old, and of considerable
size, the hall resembled a museum.
Built into a steep section of the bay
slopes, the hall enclosed many
3,2,40
chambers that were more than two or
three storeys high. Plunging display
vaults, some of great size, showed
off assemblies of weapons, from
forests of ancient swords and
halberds to modern motorised cannons,
all suffused in the pale blue glow of
the energy fields that secured them.
‘The hall is both a museum of
weapons and war devices, and an
armoury,’ Jephta Naud explained as
he greeted them. Naud was a tall,
noble creature with complicated
dermatoglyphics on the right side of
his face. His eyes were the colour of
soft gold, and he wore silver armour
and a cloak of scalloped red metal
links that made a sound like distant
3,2,41
chimes when he moved. An armoured
officer walked at his side, carrying
Naud’s crested warhelm. Though the
Astartes had come armoured, the
Warmaster had chosen to wear robes
and furs rather than his battle-
plate. He showed great and courteous
interest as Naud led them through the
deep vaults, commenting on certain
devices, remarking with delight when
archaic weapons revealed a shared
ancestry. ‘They’re trying to
impress us,’ Aximand murmured to
his brothers. ‘A museum of weapons?
They’re as good as telling us they
are so advanced… so beyond war…
they’ve been able to retire it as a
curiosity. They’re mocking us.’
3,2,42
‘No one mocks me,’ Abaddon
grunted. They were entering a chamber
where, in the chilly blue field
light, the artifacts were a great
deal stranger than before. ‘We hold
the weapons of the kinebrach here,’
Naud said, to meturge accompaniment.
‘Indeed, we preserve here, in
careful stasis, examples of the
weapons used by many of the alien
species we have encountered. The
kinebrach have, as a sign of service
to us, foresworn the bearing of arms,
unless under such circumstances as we
grant them said use in time of war.
Kinebrach technology is highly
advanced, and many of their weapons
are deemed too lethal to be left
3,2,43
beyond securement.’ Naud introduced
a hulking, robed kinebrach called
Asherot, who held the rank of Keeper
of Devices, and was the trusted
curator of the hall. Asherot spoke
the human tongue in a lisping manner,
and for the first time, the Imperials
were grateful for the meturge
accompaniment. The baffling cadences
of Asherot’s speech were rendered
crystal clear by the aria. Most of
the kinebrach weapons on display
didn’t resemble weapons at all.
Boxes, odd trinkets, rings, hoops.
Naud clearly expected the Imperials
to ask questions about the devices,
and betray their warmongering
appetites, but Horus and his officers
3,2,44
affected disinterest. In truth, they
were uneasy in the society of the
indentured alien. Only Sindermann
expressed curiosity. A very few of
the kinebrach weapons looked like
weapons: long daggers and swords of
exotic design. ‘Surely, general
commander, a blade is just a
blade?’ Sindermann asked politely.
‘These daggers here, for instance.
How are these weapons “too lethal
to be left beyond securement”?’
‘They are tailored weapons,’ Naud
replied. ‘Blades of sentient metal,
crafted by the kinebrach
metallurgists, a technique now
utterly forbidden. We call them
anathames. When such a blade is
3,2,45
selected for use against a specific
target, it becomes that target’s
nemesis, utterly inimical to the
person or being chosen.’ ‘How?’
Sindermann pressed. Naud smiled.
‘The kinebrach have never been able
to explain it to us. It is a factor
of the forging process that defies
technical evaluation.’ ‘Like a
curse?’ prompted Sindermann. ‘An
enchantment?’ The aria generated by
the meturge players around them
hiccupped slightly over those words.
To Sindermann’s surprise, Naud
replied, ‘I suppose that is how you
could describe it, iterator.’ The
tour moved on. Sindermann drew close
to Loken, and whispered, ‘I was
3,2,46
joking, Garviel, about the curse, I
mean, but he took me seriously. They
are enjoying treating us as
unsophisticated cousins, but I wonder
if their superiority is misplaced. Do
we detect a hint of pagan
superstition?’  
3,2,47
THREE
 Impasse
Illumination The wolf and the moon
They all rose as the Warmaster
entered the room. It was a large
chamber in the Extranus compound
where the Imperials met for their
regular briefings. Large shield-glass
windows overlooked the tumbling
terraces of the forested city and the
glittering ocean beyond. Horus waited
silently while six officers and
servitors from the Master of Vox’s
company finished their routine sweep
for spyware, and only spoke once they
had activated the portable
obscurement device in the corner of
the room. The distant melodies of the
3,3,1
aria were immediately blanked out.
‘Two weeks without solid
agreement,’ Horus said, ‘nor even
a mutually acceptable scheme of how
to continue. They regard us with a
mixture of curiosity and caution, and
hold us at arm’s length. Any
commentary?’ ‘We’ve exhausted
all possibilities, lord,’
Maloghurst said, ‘to the extent
that I fear we are wasting our time.
They will admit to nothing but a
willingness to open and pursue
ambassadorial links, with a view to
trade and some cultural exchange.
They will not be led on the subject
of alliance.’ ‘Or compliance,’
Abaddon remarked quietly. ‘An
3,3,2
attempt to enforce our will here,’
said Horus, ‘would only confirm
their worst opinions of us. We cannot
force them into compliance.’ ‘We
can,’ Abaddon said. ‘Then I’m
saying we shouldn’t,’ Horus
replied. ‘Since when have we
worried about hurting people’s
feelings, lord?’ Abaddon asked.
‘Whatever our differences, these
are humans. It is their duty  and
their destiny to join with us and
stand with us, for the primary glory
of Terra. If they will not…’ He
let the words hang. Horus frowned.
‘Someone else?’ ‘It seems
certain that the interex has no wish
to join us in our work,’ said
3,3,3
Raldoron. ‘They will not commit to
a war, nor do they share our goals
and ideals. They are content with
pursuing their own destiny.’
Sanguinius said nothing. He allowed
his Chapter Master to weigh in with
the opinion of the Blood Angels, but
kept his own considerable influence
for Horus’s ears alone. ‘Maybe
they fear we will try to conquer
them,’ Loken said. ‘Maybe
they’re right,’ said Abaddon.
‘They are deviant in their ways.
Too deviant for us to embrace them
without forcing change.’ ‘We will
not have war here,’ Horus said.
‘We cannot afford it. We cannot
afford to open up a conflict on this
3,3,4
front. Not at this time. Not on the
vast scale subduing the interex would
demand. If they even need
subduing.’ ‘Ezekyle has a valid
point,’ said Erebus quietly. ‘The
interex, for good reasons, I’m
sure, have built a society that is
too greatly at variance to the model
of human culture that the Emperor has
proclaimed. Unless they show a
willingness to adapt, they must by
necessity be regarded as enemies to
our cause.’ ‘Perhaps the
Emperor’s model is too
stringent,’ the Warmaster said
flatly. There was a pause. Several of
those present glanced at each other
in quiet unease. ‘Oh, come on!’
3,3,5
Sanguinius exclaimed, breaking the
silence. ‘I see those looks. Are
you honestly nursing concerns that
our Warmaster is contemplating
defiance of the Emperor? His
father?’ He laughed aloud at the
very notion, and forced a few smiles
to surface. Abaddon was not smiling.
‘The Emperor, beloved of all,’ he
began, ‘enfranchised us to do his
bidding and make known space safe for
human habitation. His edicts are
unequivocal. We must suffer not the
alien, nor the uncontrolled psyker,
safeguard against the darkness of the
warp, and unify the dislocated
pockets of mankind. That is our
charge. Anything else is sacrilege
3,3,6
against his wishes.’ ‘And one of
his wishes,’ said Horus, ‘was
that I should be Warmaster, his sole
regent, and strive to make his dreams
reality. The crusade was born out of
the Age of Strife, Ezekyle. Born out
of war. Our ruthless approach of
conquest and cleansing was formulated
in a time when every alien form we
met was hostile, every fragment of
humanity that was not with us was
profoundly opposed to us. War was the
only answer. There was no room for
subtlety, but two centuries have
passed, and different problems face
us. The bulk of war is over. That is
why the Emperor returned to Terra and
left us to finish the work. Ezekyle,
3,3,7
the people of the interex are clearly
not monsters, nor resolute foes. I
believe that if the Emperor were with
us today, he would immediately
embrace the need for adaptation. He
would not want us to wantonly destroy
that which there is no good reason to
destroy. It is precisely to make such
choices that he has placed his trust
in me.’ He looked round at them
all. ‘He trusts me to make the
decisions he would make. He trusts me
to make no mistakes. I must be
allowed the freedom to interpret
policy on his behalf. I will not be
forced into violence simply to
satisfy some slavish expectation.’
A chill evening had covered the tiers
3,3,8
of the city, and under layers of
foliage stirred by the ocean’s
breath, the walkways and pavements
were lit with frosty white lamps.
Loken’s duty for that part of the
night was as perimeter bodyguard. The
commander was dining with Jephta Naud
and other worthies at the general
commander’s palatial house. Horus
had confided to the Mournival that he
hoped to use the occasion to
informally press Naud for some more
substantial commitments, including
the possibility that the interex
might, at least in principle for now,
recognise the Emperor as the true
human authority. Such a suggestion
had not yet been risked in formal
3,3,9
talks, for the iterators had
predicted it would be rejected out of
hand. The Warmaster wanted to test
the general commander’s feelings on
the subject in an atmosphere where
any offence could be smoothed over as
conjecture. Loken didn’t much like
the idea, but trusted his commander
to couch it delicately. It was an
uneasy time, well into the third week
of their increasingly fruitless
visit. Two days earlier, Primarch
Sanguinius had finally taken his
leave and returned to Imperial
territory with the Blood Angels
contingents. Horus clearly hated to
see him go, but it was a prudent
move, and one Sanguinius had chosen
3,3,10
to make simply to buy his brother
more time with the interex.
Sanguinius was returning to deal
directly with some of the matters
most urgently requiring the
Warmaster’s attention, and thus
mollify the many voices pleading for
his immediate recall. Naud’s house
was a conspicuously vast structure
near the centre of the city. Six
storeys high, it overhung one of the
grander civic tiers and was formed
from a great black-iron frame
infilled with mosaics of varnished
wood and coloured glass. The interex
did not welcome armed foreigners
abroad in their city, but a small
detail of bodyguards was permitted
3,3,11
for so august a personage as the
Warmaster. Most of the substantial
Imperial contingent was sequestered
in the Extranus compound for the
night. Torgaddon, and ten hand-picked
men from his company, were inside the
dining hall, acting as close guard,
while Loken, with ten men of his own,
roamed the environs of the house.
Loken had chosen Tenth Company’s
Sixth Squad, Walkure Tactical Squad,
to stand duty with him. Through its
veteran leader, Brother-Sergeant
Kairus, he’d spread the men out
around the entry areas of the hall,
and formulated a simple period of
patrol. The house was quiet, the city
too. There was the sound of the soft
3,3,12
ocean breeze, the hissing of the
overgrowth, the splash and bell-
tinkle of ornamental fountains, and
the background murmur of the aria.
Loken strolled from chamber to
chamber, from shadow to light. Most
of the house’s public spaces were
lit from sources within the walls, so
they played matrices of shade and
colour across the interior, cast by
the inset wall panels of rich wood
and coloured gem-glass. Occasionally,
he encountered one of Walkure on a
patrol loop, and exchanged a nod and
a few quiet words. Less frequently,
he saw scurrying servants running
courses to and from the closed dining
hall, or crossed the path of Naud’s
3,3,13
own sentries, mostly armoured gleves,
who said nothing, but saluted to
acknowledge him. Naud’s house was a
treasure trove of art, some of it
mystifyingly alien to Loken’s
comprehension. The art was elegantly
displayed in lit alcoves and on free-
standing plinths with their own
shimmering field protection. He
understood some of it. Portraits and
busts, paintings and light
sculptures, pictures of interex
nobles and their families, studies of
animals or wildflowers, mountain
scenes, elaborate and ingenious
models of unnamed worlds opened in
mechanical cross-section like the
layers of an onion. In one lower
3,3,14
hallway in the eastern wing of the
house, Loken came upon an artwork
that especially arrested him. It was
a book, an old book, large,  rumpled,
illuminated, and held within its own
box field. The lurid woodcut
illuminations caught his eye first,
the images of devils and spectres,
angels and cherubs. Then he saw it
was written in the old text of Terra,
the language and form that had
survived from prehistory to The
Chronicles of Ursh that lay, still
unfinished, in his arming chamber. He
peered at it. A wave of his hand
across the field’s static charge
turned the pages. He turned them
right back to the front and read the
3,3,15
title page in its bold woodblock. A
Marvelous Historie of Eevil; Being a
warninge to Man Kind on the Abuses of
Sorcerie and the Seduction of the
Daemon. ‘That has taken your eye,
has it?’ Loken rose and turned. A
royal officer of the interex stood
nearby, watching him. Loken knew the
man, one of Naud’s subordinate
commanders, by the name of Mithras
Tull. What he didn’t know was how
Tull had managed to come up on him
without Loken noticing. ‘It is a
curious thing, commander,’ he said.
Tull nodded and smiled. A gleve, his
weighted spear was leant against a
pillar behind him, and he had removed
his visor to reveal his pleasant,
3,3,16
honest face. ‘A likeness,’ he
said. ‘A what?’ ‘Forgive me,
that is the word we have come to use
to refer to things that are old
enough to display our common
heritage. A likeness. That book means
as much to you as it does to us,
I’m sure.’ ‘It is curious,
certainly,’ Loken admitted. He
unclasped his helm and removed it,
out of politeness. ‘Is there a
problem, commander?’ Tull made a
dismissive gesture. ‘No, not at
all. My duties are akin to yours
tonight, captain. Security. I’m in
charge of the house patrols.’ Loken
nodded. He gestured back at the
ancient book on display. ‘So tell
3,3,17
me about this piece. If you’ve the
time?’ ‘It’s a quiet night,’
Tull smiled again. He came forward,
and brushed the field with his metal-
sleeved fingers to flip the pages.
‘My lord Jephta adores this book.
It was composed during the early
years of our history, before the
interex was properly founded, during
our outwards expansion from Terra.
Very few copies remain. A treatise
against the practice of sorcery.’
‘Naud adores it?’ Loken asked.
‘As a… what was your word again?
A curiosity?’ There was something
strange about Tull’s voice, and
Loken finally realised what it was.
This was  the first conversation
3,3,18
he’d had with a representative of
the interex without meturge players
producing the aria in the background.
‘It’s such a woebegotten, dark
age piece,’ Tull continued. ‘So
doomy and apocalyptic. Imagine,
captain… men of Terra, voyaging out
into the stars, equipped with great
and wonderful technologies, and
fearing the dark so much they have to
compose treatises on daemons.’
‘Daemons?’ ‘Indeed. This warns
against witches, gross practices,
familiars, and the arts by which a
man might transform into a daemon and
prey upon his own kind.’ . their
own Some became daemons and turned
upon ‘So… you regard it as a
3,3,19
joke? An odd throwback to
unenlightened days?’ Tull shrugged.
‘Not a joke, captain. Just an old-
fashioned, alarmist approach. The
interex is a mature society. We
understand the threat of Kaos well
enough, and set it in its place.’
‘Chaos?’ Tull frowned. ‘Yes,
captain. Kaos. You say the word like
you’ve never heard it before.’
‘I know the word. You say it like
it has a specific connotation.’
‘Well, of course it has,’ Tull
said. ‘No star-faring race in the
cosmos can operate without
understanding the nature of Kaos. We
thank the eldar for teaching us the
rudiments of it, but we would have
3,3,20
recognised it soon enough without
their help. Surely, one can’t use
the immaterium for any length of time
without coming to terms with Kaos as
a…’ his voice trailed off.
‘Great and holy heavens! You
don’t know, do you?’ ‘Don’t
know what?’ Loken snapped. Tull
began to laugh, but it wasn’t
mocking. ‘All this time, we’ve
been pussyfooting around you and your
great Warmaster, fearing the
worst…’ Loken took a step
forward. ‘Commander,’ he said,
‘I will own up to ignorance and
embrace illumination, but I will not
be laughed at.’ ‘Forgive me.’
‘Tell me why I should. Illuminate
3,3,21
me.’ Tull stopped laughing and
stared into Loken’s face. His blue
eyes were terribly cold and hard.
‘Kaos is the damnation of all
mankind, Loken. Kaos will outlive us
and dance on our ashes. All we can
do, all we can strive for, is to
recognise its menace and keep it at
bay, for as long as we persist.’
‘Not enough,’ said Loken.  Tull
shook his head sadly. ‘We were so
wrong,’ he said. ‘About what?’
‘About you. About the Imperium. I
must go to Naud at once and explain
this to him. If only the substance of
this had come out earlier…’
‘Explain it to me first. Now.
Here.’ Tull gazed at Loken for a
3,3,22
long, silent moment, as if judging
his options. Finally, he shrugged and
said, ‘Kaos is a primal force of
the cosmos. It resides within the
immaterium… what you call the warp.
It is a source of the most malevolent
and complete corruption and evil. It
is the greatest enemy of mankind –
both interex and Imperial, I mean –
because it destroys from within, like
a canker. It is insidious. It is not
like a hostile alien form to be
defeated or expunged. It spreads like
a disease. It is at the root of all
sorcery and magic. It is…’ He
hesitated and looked at Loken with a
pained expression. ‘It is the
reason we have kept you at arm’s
3,3,23
length. You have to understand that
when we first made contact, we were
exhilarated, overjoyed. At last. At
last! Contact with our lost kin,
contact with Terra, after so many
generations. It was a dream we had
all cherished, but we knew we had to
be careful. In the ages since we last
had contact with Terra, things might
have changed. An age of strife and
damnation had passed. There was no
guarantee that the men, who looked
like men, and claimed to come from
Terra in the name of a new Terran
Emperor, might not be agents of Kaos
in seemly guise. There was no
guarantee that while the men of the
interex remained pure, the men of
3,3,24
Terra might have become polluted and
transformed by the ways of Kaos.’
‘We are not–’ ‘Let me finish,
Loken. Kaos, when it manifests, is
brutal, rapacious, warlike. It is a
force of unquenchable destruction. So
the eldar have taught us, and the
kinebrach, and so the pure men of the
interex have stood to check Kaos
wherever it rears its warlike visage.
Tell me, captain, how warlike do you
appear? Vast and bulky, bred for
battle, driven to destroy, led by a
man you happily title Warmaster?
Warmaster? What manner of rank is
that? Not Emperor, not commander, not
general, but Warmaster. The bluntness
of the term reeks of Kaos. We want to
3,3,25
embrace you, yearn to embrace you, to
join with you, to stand shoulder to
shoulder with you, but we fear you,
Loken. You resemble the enemy we have
been raised from birth to anticipate.
The all-conquering, unrelenting
daemon of Kaos-war. The bloody-handed
god of  annihilation.’ ‘That is
not us,’ said Loken, aghast. Tull
nodded eagerly. ‘I know it. I see
it now. Truly. We have made a mistake
in our delays. There is no taint in
you. There is only the most
surprising innocence.’ ‘I’ll
try not to be offended.’ Tull
laughed and clasped his hands around
Loken’s right fist. ‘No need, no
need. We can show you the dangers to
3,3,26
watch for. We can be brothers
and–’ He paused suddenly, and
took his hands away. ‘What is
it?’ Loken asked. Tull was
listening to his comm-relay. His face
darkened. ‘Understood,’ he said
to his collar mic. ‘Action at
once.’ He looked back at Loken.
‘Security lock-down, captain.
Would… I’m sorry, this seems very
blunt after what we’ve just been
saying… but would you surrender
your weapons to me?’ ‘My
weapons?’ ‘Yes, captain.’
‘I’m sorry, commander. I can’t
do that. Not while my commander is in
the building.’ Tull cleared his
throat and carefully fitted his visor
3,3,27
plate to his armour. He reached out
and carefully took hold of his spear.
‘Captain Loken,’ he said, his
voice now gusting from his audio
relays, ‘I demand you turn your
weapons over to me at this time.’
Loken took a step back. ‘For what
reason?’ ‘I don’t have to give
a reason, dammit! I’m officer of
the watch, on interex territory. Hand
over your weapons!’ Loken clamped
his own helm in place. The visor
screens were alarmingly blank. He
checked sub-vox and security
channels, trying to reach Kairus,
Torgaddon or any of the bodyguard
detail. His suit systems were being
comprehensively blocked. ‘Are you
3,3,28
damping me?’ he asked. ‘City
systems are damping you. Hand me your
sidearm, Loken.’ ‘I’m afraid I
can’t. My priority is to safeguard
my commander.’ Tull shook his
armoured head. ‘Oh, you’re
clever. Very clever. You almost had
me there. You almost had me believing
you were innocent.’ ‘Tull, I
don’t know what’s going on.’
‘Naturally you don’t.’
‘Commander Tull, we had reached an
understanding, man to man. Why are
you doing this?’ ‘Seduction. You
almost had me. It was very good, but
you got the timing off. You showed
your hand too soon.’ ‘Hand? What
hand?’ ‘Don’t pretend. The Hall
3,3,29
of Devices is burning. You’ve made
your move. Now the interex
replies.’ ‘Tull,’ Loken warned,
placing his hand firmly on the pommel
of his blade. ‘Don’t make me
fight you.’ With a snarl of
disappointed rage, Tull swung his
spear at Loken. The interex officer
moved with astounding speed. Even
with his hand on his blade, Loken had
no time to draw it. He managed to
snatch up his plated arms to fend off
the blow, and the two that followed
it. The lightweight armour of the
interex soldiery seemed to facilitate
the most dazzling motion and
dexterity, perhaps even augmenting
the user’s natural abilities.
3,3,30
Tull’s attack was fluent and
professional, slicing in blows with
the long spear blade designed to
force Loken back and down into
submission. The microfine edge of the
blade hacked several deep gouges into
Loken’s plating. ‘Tull! Stop!’
‘Surrender to me now!’ Loken had
no wish to fight, and scarcely any
clue as to what had turned Tull so
suddenly and completely, but he had
no intention of surrendering. The
Warmaster was on site, exposed. As
far as Loken knew, all Imperial
agents in the area had been deprived
of vox and sensor links. There was no
cue to the Warmaster’s party, or to
the Extranus compound, and certainly
3,3,31
none to the fleet. He knew his
priority was simple. He was a weapon,
an instrument, and he had one simply
defined purpose: protect the life of
the Warmaster. All other issues were
entirely secondary and moot. Loken
focussed. He felt the power in his
limbs, in the suddenly warming,
suddenly active flex of the polymer
muscles in his suit’s inner skin.
He felt the throb of the power unit
against the small of his back as it
obeyed his instincts and yielded full
power. He’d been swatting away the
spear blows, allowing Tull to
disfigure his plate. No more. He
swung out, met the next blow, and
smashed the blade aside with the ball
3,3,32
of his fist. Tull travelled with the
recoil expertly, spinning and using
the momentum to drive a thrust
directly at Loken’s chest. It never
landed. Loken caught the spear at the
base of the blade with his left hand,
moving as quickly and dazzlingly as
the interex officer, and stopped it
dead. Before Tull could pull free,
Loken punched with his right fist
against the flat of the blade and
broke the entire blade-tip off the
spear. It spun away, end over end.
Tull rallied, and rotated the broken
weapon to drive the weighted base-end
at Loken like a long club. Loken
guarded off two heavy blows from the
ballend with the edges of his
3,3,33
gauntlets. Tull twisted his grip, and
the spear suddenly became charged
with dancing blue sparks of
electrical charge. He slammed the
crackling ball at Loken again and
there was a loud bang. The
discharging force of the spear was so
powerful that Loken was thrown bodily
across the chamber. He landed on the
polished floor and slid a few metres,
dying webs of charge flickering
across his chestplate. He tasted
blood in his mouth, and felt the
brief, quickly-occluded pain of
serious bruising to his torso. Loken
scissored his back and legs, and
sprang up on to his feet as Tull
closed in. Now he brought his sword
3,3,34
out. In the multi-coloured light, the
white-steel blade of his combat sword
shone like a spike of ice in his
fist. He offered Tull no opportunity
to renew the bout as aggressor. Loken
launched forward at the charging man
and swung hammer blows with his
sword. Tull recoiled, forced to use
the remains of the spear as a
parrying tool, the Imperial blade
biting chips out of its haft. Tull
leapt back, and drew his own sword
over his shoulder from the scabbard
over his back. He clutched the long,
silver sword – a good ten fingers
longer than Loken’s utilitarian
blade – in his right hand, and the
spear/club in his left. When he came
3,3,35
in again, he was swinging blows with
both. Loken’s Astartes-born senses
predicted and matched all of the
strikes. His blade flicked left and
right, spinning the club back and
parrying the sword with two loud
chimes of metal. He forced his way
into Tull’s bodyline guard and
pressed his sword aside long enough
to shoulder-barge the royal officer
in the chest. Tull staggered back.
Loken gave him no respite. He swung
again and tore the club out of
Tull’s left hand. It bounced across
the floor, sparking and firing. Then
they closed, blade on blade, The
exchange was furious. Loken had no
doubts about his own ability: he’d
3,3,36
been tested too many times of late,
and not found wanting. But Tull was
evidently a master swordsman and,
more significantly, had learned his
art via some entirely different
school of bladesmanship. There was no
common language in their fight, no
shared basis of technique. Every blow
and parry and riposte, each one
essayed was inexplicable and foreign
to the other. Every millisecond of
the exchange was a potentially lethal
learning curve. It was almost
enjoyable. Fascinating. Inventive.
Illuminating. Loken believed Lucius
would have enjoyed such a match, so
many new techniques to delight at.
But it was wasting time. Loken
3,3,37
parried Tull’s next quicksilver
slice, captured his right wrist
firmly in his left hand, and struck
off Tull’s swordarm at the elbow
with a neat and deliberate chop. Tull
rocked backwards, blood venting from
his stump. Loken tossed the sword and
severed limb aside. He grabbed Tull
by the face and was about to perform
the mercy stroke, the quick, down-up
decapitation, then thought better of
it. He smashed Tull in the side of
the head with his sword instead,
using the flat. Tull went flying. His
body cartwheeled clumsily across the
floor and came to rest against the
foot of one of the display plinths.
Blood leaked out of it in a wide
3,3,38
pool. ‘This is Loken, Loken,
Loken!’ Loken yelled in this link.
Nothing but dead patterns and static.
Switching his blade to his left hand,
he drew his bolter and ran forward.
He’d gone three steps when the two
sagittars bounded into the chamber.
They saw him, and their bows were
already drawn to fire. Loken put a
bolt round into the wall behind them
and made them flinch. ‘Drop the
bows!’ he ordered via his helmet
speakers. The bolter in his hand told
them not to argue. They threw aside
the bows and shafts with a clatter.
Loken nodded his head at Tull, his
gun still covering them both.
‘I’ve no wish to see him die,’
3,3,39
he said. ‘Bind his arm quickly
before he bleeds out.’ They wavered
and then ran to Tull’s side. When
they looked up again, Loken had gone.
He ran down a hallway into an
adjoining colonnade, hearing what was
certainly bolter firing in the
distance. Another sagittar appeared
ahead, and  fired what seemed like a
laser bolt at him. The shot went wide
past his left shoulder. Loken aimed
his bolter and put the warrior on his
back, hard. No room for compassion
now. Two more interex soldiers came
into view, another sagittar and a
gleve. Loken, still running, shot
them both before they could react.
The force of his bolts, both torso-
3,3,40
shots, threw the soldiers back
against the wall, where they
slithered to the ground. Abaddon had
been wrong. The armour of the interex
warriors was masterful, not weak. His
rounds hadn’t penetrated the
chestplates of either of the men, but
the sheer, concussive force of the
impacts had taken them out of the
fight, probably pulping their
innards. He heard footsteps and
turned. It was Kairus and one of his
men, Oltrentz. Both had weapons
drawn. ‘What the hell’s
happening, captain?’ Kairus yelled.
‘With me!’ Loken demanded.
‘Where’s the rest of the
detail?’ ‘I have no idea,’
3,3,41
Kairus complained. ‘The vox is
dead!’ ‘We’re being damped,’
Oltrentz added. ‘Priority is the
Warmaster,’ Loken assured them.
‘Follow me and–’ More flashes,
like laser fire. Projectiles, moving
so fast they were just lines of
light, zipped down the colonnade,
faster than Loken could track.
Oltrentz dropped onto his knees with
a heavy clang, transfixed by two
flightless arrows that had cut clean
through his Mark IV plate. Clean
through. Loken could still remember
Torgaddon’s amusement and
Aximand’s assurance… They’re
probably ceremonial. Oltrentz fell
onto his face. He was dead, and there
3,3,42
was no time, and no Apothecary, to
make his death fruitful. Further
shafts flashed by. Loken felt an
impact. Kairus staggered as a
sagittar’s dart punched entirely
through his torso and embedded itself
in the wall behind him. ‘Kairus!’
‘Keep on, captain!’ Kairus
drawled, in pain. ‘Too clean a
shot. I’ll heal!’ Kairus rose and
opened up with his storm bolter,
firing on auto. He hosed the
colonnade ahead of them, and Loken
saw three sagittars crumble and
explode under the thunderous pummel
of the weapon. Now their armour
broke. Under six of seven consecutive
explosive penetrators, nowtheir
3,3,43
armour broke. , Loken thought. He
moved on, with How we have
underestimated them  Kairus limping
behind him. Already Kairus had
stopped bleeding. His genhanced body
had self-healed the entry and exit
wounds, and whatever the sagittar
dart had skewered between those two
points was undoubtedly being
compensated for by the built-in
redundancies of the Astartes’s
anatomy. Together, they kicked their
way into the main dining hall. The
room was chaotic. Torgaddon and the
rest of his detail were covering the
Warmaster as they led him towards the
south exit. There was no sign of
Naud, but interex soldiers were
3,3,44
firing at Torgaddon’s group from a
doorway on the far side of the
chamber. Bolter fire lit up the air.
Several bodies, including that of a
Luna Wolf, lay twisted amongst the
overturned chairs and banquet tables.
Loken and Kairus trained their fire
on the far doorway. ‘Tarik!’
‘Good to see you, Garvi!’ ‘What
the hell is this?’ ‘A mistake,’
Horus roared, his voice cracking with
despair. ‘This is wrong! Wrong!’
Brilliant shafts of light stung into
the wall alongside them. Sag-ittar
darts sliced through the smoky air.
One of Torgaddon’s men buckled and
fell, a dart speared through his
helm. ‘Mistake or not, we have to
3,3,45
get clear. Now!’ Loken yelled.
‘Zakes! Cyclos! Regold!’
Torgaddon yelled, firing. ‘Close
with Captain Loken and see us out!’
‘With me!’ Loken shouted.
‘No!’ bellowed the Warmaster.
‘Not like this! We can’t–’
‘Go!’ Loken screamed at his
commander. The fight to extricate
themselves from Naud’s house lasted
ten furious minutes. Loken and Kairus
led the rearguard with the brothers
Torgaddon had appointed to them,
while Torgaddon himself ferried the
Warmaster out through the basement
loading docks onto the street. Twice,
Horus insisted on going back in, not
wanting to leave anyone, especially
3,3,46
not Loken, behind. Somehow, using
words Torgaddon never shared with
Loken, Torgaddon persuaded him
otherwise. By the time they had come
out into the street, the remainder of
Loken’s outer guard had formed up
with them, adding to the armour wall
around the Warmaster, all except
Jaeldon, whose fate they never
learned. The rearguard was a savage
action. Backing metre by metre
through the  exit hall and the
loading dock, Loken’s group came
under immense fire, most of it dart-
shot from sagittars, but also some
energised beams from heavy weapons.
Bells and sirens were ringing
everywhere. Zakes fell in the loading
3,3,47
dock, his head shorn away by a blue-
white beam of destruction that
scorched the walls. Cyclos, his body
a pincushion of darts, dropped at the
doors of the exit hall. Prone,
bleeding furiously, he tried to fire
again, but two more shafts impaled
his skull and nailed him to the door.
Kairus took another dart through the
left thigh as he gave Loken cover.
Regold was felled by an arrow that
pierced his right eyeslit, and got up
in time to be finished by another
through the neck. Firing behind him,
Loken dragged Kairus out through the
dock area onto the street. They were
out into the city evening, the dark
canopy hissing in the breeze over
3,3,48
their heads. Lamps twinkled. In the
distance, a ruddy glow backlit the
clouds, spilling up from a building
in the lower depths of the tiered
city. Sirens wailed around them.
‘I’m all right,’ Kairus said,
though it was clear he was having
trouble standing. ‘Close, that one,
captain.’ He reached up and plucked
out a sagittar shaft that had stuck
through Loken’s right shoulder
plate. In the colonnade, the impact
he’d felt. ‘Not close enough,
brother,’ Loken said. ‘Come on,
if you’re coming!’ Torgaddon
yelled, approaching them and spraying
bolter fire back down the dock.
‘This is a mess,’ Loken said.
3,3,49
‘As if I hadn’t noticed!’
Torgaddon spat. He uncoupled a charge
pack from his belt and hurled it down
the dockway. The blast sent smoke and
debris tumbling out at them. ‘We
have to get the Warmaster to
safety,’ Torgaddon said. ‘To the
Extranus.’ Loken nodded. ‘We have
to–’ ‘No,’ said a voice. They
looked round. Horus stood beside
them. His face was sidelit by the
burning dock. His wide-set eyes were
fierce. He had dressed for dinner
that night, not for war. He was
wearing a robe and a wolf-pelt. It
was clear from his manner that he
itched for armour plate and a good
sword. ‘With respect, sir,’
3,3,50
Torgaddon said. ‘We are drawn
bodyguard. You are our
responsibility.’ ‘No,’ Horus
said again. ‘Protect me by all
means, but I will not go quietly.
Some terrible mistake has been made
tonight. All we have worked for is
overthrown.’ ‘And so, we must get
you out alive,’ Torgaddon said.
‘Tarik’s right, lord,’ Loken
added. ‘This is not a situation
that–’ ‘Enough, enough, my
son,’ Horus said. He looked up at
the sighing black branches above
them. ‘What has gone so wrong? Naud
took such great and sudden offence.
He said we had transgressed.’ ‘I
spoke with a man,’ Loken said.
3,3,51
‘Just when things turned sour. He
was telling me of Chaos.’
‘What?’ ‘Of Chaos, and how it
is our greatest common foe. He feared
it was in us. He said that is why
they had been so careful with us,
because they feared we had brought
Chaos with us. Lord, what did he
mean?’ Horus looked at Loken. ‘He
meant Jubal. He meant the
Whisperheads. He meant the warp. Have
you brought the warp here, Garviel
Loken?’ ‘No, sir.’ ‘Then the
fault is within them. The great,
great fault that the Emperor himself,
beloved by all, told me to watch for,
foremost of all things. Oh gods, I
wished this place to be free of it.
3,3,52
To be clean. To be cousins we could
hug to our chests. Now we know the
truth.’ Loken shook his head.
‘Sir, no. I don’t think that’s
what was meant. I think these people
despise Chaos… the warp… as much
as we do. I think they only fear it
in us, and tonight, something has
proved that fear right.’ ‘Like
what?’ Torgaddon snapped. ‘Tull
said the Hall of Devices was on
fire.’ Horus nodded. ‘This is
what they accused us of. Robbery.
Deceit. Murder. Apparently someone
raided the Hall of Devices tonight
and slew the curator. Weapons were
stolen.’ ‘What weapons, sir?’
Loken asked. Horus shook his head.
3,3,53
‘Naud didn’t say. He was too busy
accusing me over the dinner table.
That’s where we should go now.’
Torgaddon laughed derisively. ‘Not
at all. We have to get you to safety,
sir. That is our priority.’ The
Warmaster looked at Loken. ‘Do you
think this also?’  ‘Yes, lord.’
‘Then I am troubled that I will
have to countermand you both. I
respect your efforts to safeguard me.
Your strenuous loyalty is noted. Now
take me to the Hall of Devices.’
The hall was on fire. Bursting fields
exploded through the lower depths of
the placer and cascaded flames up
into the higher galleries. A meturge
player, blackened by smoke, limped
3,3,54
out to greet them. ‘Have you not
sinned enough?’ he asked,
venomously. ‘What is it you think
we have done?’ Horus asked.
‘Petty murder. Asherot is dead. The
hall is burning. You could have asked
to know of our weapons. You had no
need to kill to win them.’ Horus
shook his head. ‘We have done
nothing.’ The meturge player
laughed, then fell. ‘Help him,’
Horus said. Scads of ash were falling
on them, drizzling from a choking
black sky. The blaze had spread to
the oversweeping forest, and the
street was flame lit. There was a
rank smell of burning vegetation. On
lower street tiers, hundreds of
3,3,55
figures gathered, looking up at the
fire. A great panic, a horror was
spreading through Xenobia Principis.
‘They feared us from the start,’
the Warmaster said. ‘Suspected us.
Now this. They will believe they were
right to do so.’ ‘Enemy warriors
are gathering on the approach
steps,’ Kairus called out.
‘Enemy?’ Horus laughed. ‘When
did they become the enemy? They are
men like us.’ He glared up at the
night sky, threw back his head and
screamed a curse at the stars. Then
his voice fell to a whisper. Loken
was close enough to hear his words.
‘Why have you tasked me with this,
father? Why have you forsaken me?
3,3,56
Why? It is too hard. It is too much.
Why did you leave me to do this on my
own?’ Interex formations were
approaching. Loken heard hooves
clatter-ing on the flagstones, and
saw the shapes of mounted sagittars
bobbing black against the fires.
Darts, like bright tears, began to
drizzle through the night. They
struck the ground and the walls
nearby. ‘My lord, no more
delays,’ Torgaddon urged. Gleves
were massing too,  their moving
spears black stalks against the
orange glow. Sparks flew up like lost
prayers into the sky. ‘Hold!’
Horus bellowed at the advancing
soldiers. ‘In the name of the
3,3,57
Emperor of Mankind! I demand to speak
to Naud. Fetch him now!’ The only
reply was another flurry of shafts.
The Luna Wolf beside Torgaddon fell
dead, and another staggered back,
wounded. An arrow had embedded itself
in the Warmaster’s left arm.
Without wincing, he dragged it out,
and watched his blood spatter the
flagstones at his feet. He walked to
the fallen Astartes, bent down, and
gathered up the man’s bolter and
sword. ‘Their mistake,’ he said
to Loken and Torgaddon. ‘Their damn
mistake. Not ours. If they’re going
to fear us, let us give them good
reason.’ He raised the sword in his
fist. ‘For the Emperor!’ he
3,3,58
yelled in Cthonic. ‘Illuminate
them!’ ‘Lupercal! Lupercal!’
answered the handful of warriors
around him. They met the charging
sagittars head on, bolter fire
strobing the narrow street. Robot
steeds shattered and tumbled, men
falling from them, arms spread wide.
Horus was already moving to meet
them, ripping his sword into steel
flanks and armoured chests. His first
blow knocked a man-horse clear into
the air, hooves kicking, crashing it
back over onto the ranks behind it.
‘Lupercal!’ Loken yelled, coming
to the Warmaster’s right side, and
swinging his sword double-handed.
Torgaddon covered the left, striking
3,3,59
down a trio of gleves, then using a
lance taken from one of them to smite
the pack that followed. Interex
soldiers, some screaming, were forced
back down the steps, or toppled over
the stone railing of the street to
plunge onto the tier beneath. Of all
the battles Loken had fought at his
commander’s side, that was the
fiercest, the saddest, the most
vicious. Teeth bared in the
firelight, swinging his blade at the
foe on all sides, Horus seemed more
noble than Loken had ever known. He
would remember that moment, years
later, when fate had played its cruel
trick and sense had turned upside
down. He would remember Horus,
3,3,60
Warmaster, in that narrow firelit
street, defining the honour and
unyielding courage of the Imperium of
Man. There should have been frescoes
painted, poems written, symphonies
composed, all to celebrate that
instant when Horus made his most
absolute statement of devotion to the
Throne. And to his father.  There
would be none. The hateful future
swallowed up such poss-ibilities,
swallowed the memories too, until the
very fact of that nobility became
impossible to believe. The enemy
warriors, and they were enemy
warriors now, choked the street,
driving the Warmaster and his few
remaining bodyguards into a tight
3,3,61
ring. A last stand. It was oddly as
he had imagined it, that night in the
garden, making his oath. Some great,
last stand against an unknown foe,
fighting at Horus’s side. He was
covered in blood, his suit gouged and
dented in a hundred places. He did
not falter. Through the smoke above,
Loken glimpsed a moon, a small moon
glowing in the corner of the alien
sky. Appropriately, it was reflected
in the glimmering mirror of ocean out
in the bay. ‘Lupercal!’ screamed
Loken.  
3,3,62
FOUR
 Parting shots The Sons
of Horus Anathame ‘What was
taken?’ Mersadie Oliton asked. ‘A
weapon, so they claim.’ ‘One
weapon?’ ‘We didn’t take it,’
Loken said, stripping off the last of
his battered armour. ‘We took
nothing. The killing was for
nothing.’ She shrugged. She took a
sheaf of papers from her gown. They
were Karkasy’s latest offerings,
and she had come to the arming
chamber on the pretence of delivering
them. In truth, she was hoping to
learn what had befallen on Xenobia.
‘Will you tell me?’ she asked. He
looked up. There was dried blood on
3,4,1
his face and hands. ‘Yes,’ he
said. The battle of Xenobia Principis
lasted until dawn, and engulfed much
of the city. At the first sign of
commotion, unable to establish
contact with either the Warmaster or
the fleet, Abaddon and Aximand had
mobilised the two companies of Luna
Wolves garrisoned at the Extranus. In
the streets surrounding the compound
area, the people of the interex got
their first taste of the power of the
Imperial Astartes. In the years to
come, they would experience a good
deal more. Abaddon was in wrathful
mood, so much so that Aximand had to
rein him back on several occasions.
It was Aximand’s units that first
3,4,2
reached the embattled Warmaster on
the  upper tier near the Hall of
Devices, and fought a route to him
through the cream of Naud’s army.
Abaddon’s forces had struck at
several of the city’s control
stations, and restored
communications. The fleet was already
moving in, in response to the
apparent threat to the Warmaster and
the Imperial parties on the ground.
As interex warships moved to engage,
landing assaults began, led by
Sedirae and Targost. With
communications restored, a fullscale
extraction was coordinated, drawing
all Imperial personnel from the
Extranus, and from fighting zones in
3,4,3
the streets. Horus sent one final
communiqué to the interex. He
expected no response, and received
none. Far too much blood had been
spilled and destruction wrought for
relations to be soothed by diplomacy.
Nevertheless, Horus expressed his
bitter regret at the turn of events,
lamented the interex for acting with
such a heavy hand, and repeated once
again his unequivocal denial that the
Imperium had committed any of the
crimes of which it stood accused.
When the ships of the expedition
returned to Imperial space, some
weeks later, the Warmaster had a
decree proclaimed. He told the
Mournival that, upon reflection, he
3,4,4
had reconsidered the importance of
defining his role, and the
relationship of the XVI Legion to
that role. Henceforth, the Luna
Wolves would be known as the Sons of
Horus. The news was well-received. In
the quiet corners of the flagship
archives, Kyril Sindermann was told
by some of his iterators, and
approved the decision, before turning
back to books that he was the first
person to read in a thousand years.
In the bustle of the Retreat, the
remembrancers – many of whom had
been extracted from the Extranus by
the Astartes efforts – cheered and
drank to the new name. Ignace Karkasy
sank a drink to the honour of the
3,4,5
Legion, and Captain Loken in
particular, and then had another one
just to be sure. In her private room,
Euphrati Keeler knelt by her secret
shrine and thanked her god, the
Emperor of Mankind, in the simple
terms of the Lectitio Divinitatus,
praising him for giving strong and
honourable men to protect them. Sons
of Horus, all.  Air hummed down
rusting ducts and flues. Darkness
pooled in the belly vaults of the
Vengeful Spirit , in the bilges where
even the lowliest ratings and proto-
servitors seldom strayed. Only vermin
lived here, insect lice and rats,
gnawing a putrid existence in the
corroded bowels of the ancient ship.
3,4,6
By the light of a single candle, he
held the strange blade up and watched
how the glow coruscated off its edge.
The blade was rippled along its
length, grey like napped flint, and
caught the light with a glitter like
diamond. A fine thing. A beautiful
thing. A cosmos-changing thing. He
could feel the promise within it
breathing. The promise and the curse.
Slowly, Erebus lowered the anathame,
placed it in its casket, and closed
the lid. ‘And that is all?’ ‘We
tried,’ said Loken. ‘We tried to
bond with them. It was a brave thing,
a noble thing to attempt. War would
have been easier. But it failed.’
‘Yes,’ he said. Loken had taken
3,4,7
up the lapping powder and a cloth,
and was working at the scratches and
gouges on his breastplate, knowing
full well the scars were too deep
this time. He’d have to fetch the
armourers. ‘So it was a tragedy?’
she asked. ‘Yes,’ he nodded,
‘but not of our making. I’ve
never… I’ve never felt so
sure.’ ‘Of what?’ she asked.
‘Horus, as Warmaster. As the
Emperor’s proxy. I’ve never
questioned it. But seeing him there,
seeing what he was trying to do.
I’ve never felt so sure the Emperor
made the right choice.’ ‘What
happens now?’ ‘With the interex?
I imagine attempts will be made to
3,4,8
broker peace. The priority will be
low, for the interex are marginal and
show no inclination to get involved
in our affairs. If peace fails, then,
in time, a military expedition will
be drawn up.’ ‘And for us? Are
you allowed to tell me the
expedition’s orders?’ Loken
smiled and shrugged. ‘We’re due
to rendezvous with the 203rd Fleet in
a month, at Sardis, prior to a
campaign of compliance in the Caiades
Cluster, but on the way, a brief
detour. We’re to settle a minor
dispute. An old tally, if you will.
First Chaplain Erebus has asked the
Warmaster to  intercede. We’ll be
there and gone again in a week or
3,4,9
so.’ ‘Intercede where?’ she
asked. ‘A little moon,’ Loken
said, ‘in the Davin System.’
